
J. R. R. Tolkien  The Lord Of The Rings. (1/4)
THE LORD OF THE RINGS
by
J. R. R. TOLKIEN
Part 1: The Fellowship of the Ring
Part 2: The Two Towers
Part 3: The Return of the King
_Complete with Index and Full Appendices_
_Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie._
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
PROLOGUE
1. Concerning Hobbits
2. Concerning Pipe-weed
3. Of the Ordering of the Shire
4. Of the Finding of the Ring
Note on the Shire records
THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING
Book I
Chapter 1 A Long-expected Party
Chapter 2 The Shadow of the Past
Chapter 3 Three is Company
Chapter 4 A Short Cut to Mushrooms
Chapter 5 A Conspiracy Unmasked
Chapter 6 The Old Forest
Chapter 7 In the House of Tom Bombadil
Chapter 8 Fog on the Barrow-Downs
Chapter 9 At the Sign of The Prancing Pony
Chapter 10 Strider

Chapter 11 A Knife in the DarkChapter 12 Flight to the Ford
Book II
Chapter 1 Many MeetingsChapter 2 The Council of ElrondChapter 3 The Ring Goes SouthChapter 4 A Journey in the DarkChapter 5 The Bridge of Khazad-d.mChapter 6 Lothl车rienChapter 7 The Mirror of GaladrielChapter 8 Farewell to L车rienChapter 9 The Great RiverChapter 10 The Breaking of the Fellowship
THE TWO TOWERS
Book III
Chapter 1 The Departure of BoromirChapter 2 The Riders of RohanChapter 3 The Uruk-HaiChapter 4 TreebeardChapter 5 The White RiderChapter 6 The King of the Golden HallChapter 7 Helm's DeepChapter 8 The Road to IsengardChapter 9 Flotsam and JetsamChapter 10 The Voice of SarumanChapter 11 The Palantyr
Book IV
Chapter 1 The Taming of Sm谷agolChapter 2 The Passage of the MarshesChapter 3 The Black Gate is ClosedChapter 4 Of Herbs and Stewed RabbitChapter 5 The Window on the WestChapter 6 The Forbidden PoolChapter 7 Journey to the Cross-roadsChapter 8 The Stairs of Cirith UngolChapter 9 Shelob's LairChapter 10 The Choices of Master Samwise
THE RETURN OF THE KING
Book V
Chapter 1 Minas TirithChapter 2 The Passing of the Grey CompanyChapter 3 The Muster of RohanChapter 4 The Siege of GondorChapter 5 The Ride of the RohirrimChapter 6 The Battle of the Pelennor FieldsChapter 7 The Pyre of DenethorChapter 8 The Houses of HealingChapter 9 The Last Debate

Chapter 10 The Black Gate Opens
Book VI
Chapter 1 The Tower of Cirith Ungol
Chapter 2 The Land of Shadow
Chapter 3 Mount Doom
Chapter 4 The Field of Cormallen
Chapter 5 The Steward and the King
Chapter 6 Many Partings
Chapter 7 Homeward Bound
Chapter 8 The Scouring of the Shire
Chapter 9 The Grey Havens
APPENDICES
A ANNALS OF THE KINGS AND RULERS
I The N~menorean Kings
(I) N~menor
(II) The Realms In Exile
(III) Eriador, Arnor, and The Heirs Of Isildur
(IV) Gondor and The Heirs Of An.rion
(V) Here Follows a Part of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen
II THE HOUSE OF EORL
III DURIN'S FOLK
Here follows one of the last notes in the Red Book
B THE TALE OF YEARS (CHRONOLOGY OF THE WESTLANDS)
The Second Age
The Third Age
C FAMILY TREES
D CALENDARS
SHIRE CALENDAR FOR USE IN ALL YEARS
THE CALENDARS
E WRITING AND SPELLING
I Pronunciation of Words and Names
II Writing
F
I The Languages and Peoples of The Third Age
II On Translation
INDEXES
I Songs and Verses
II Persons, Beasts and MonstersIII Places
IV Things

FOREWORD
This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the Great War ofthe Ring and included many glimpses of the yet more ancient history thatpreceded it. It was begun soon after _The Hobbit_ was written and before itspublication in 1937; but I did not go on with this sequel, for I wished firstto complete and set in order the mythology and legends of the Elder Days,
which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do this for myown satisfaction, and I had little hope that other people would be interestedin this work, especially since it was primarily linguistic in inspiration andwas begun in order to provide the necessary background of 'history' for Elvishtongues.
When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected _little hope_ to_no hope,_ I went back to the sequel, encouraged by requests from readers formore information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story wasdrawn irresistibly towards the older world, and became an account, as it were,
of its end and passing away before its beginning and middle had been told. Theprocess had begun in the writing of _The Hobbit,_ in which there were alreadysome references to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the High-elves, and theorcs, as well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of things higher or deeperor darker than its surface: Durin, Moria, Gandalf, the Necromancer, the Ring.
The discovery of the significance of these glimpses and of their relation tothe ancient histories revealed the Third Age and its culmination in the War ofthe Ring.
Those who had asked for more information about hobbits eventually got it,
but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of _The Lord of theRings_ went on at intervals during the years 1936 to 1949, a period in which Ihad many duties that I did not neglect, and many other interests as a learnerand teacher that often absorbed me. The delay was, of course, also increasedby the outbreak of war in 1939, by the end of which year the tale had not yetreached the end of Book One. In spite of the darkness of the next five years Ifound that the story could not now be wholly abandoned, and I plodded on,
mostly by night, till I stood by Balin's tomb in Moria. There I halted for along while. It was almost a year later when I went on and so came toLothl车rien and the Great River late in 1941. In the next year I wrote thefirst drafts of the matter that now stands as Book Three, and the beginningsof chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as the beacons flared in An车rienand Th谷oden came to Harrowdale I stopped. Foresight had failed and there wasno time for thought.
It was during 1944 that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of a warwhich it was my task to conduct, or at least to report, 1 forced myself totackle the journey of Frodo to Mordor. These chapters, eventually to becomeBook Four, were written and sent out as a serial to my son, Christopher, thenin South Africa with the RAF. Nonetheless it took another five years beforethe tale was brought to its present end; in that time I changed my house, mychair, and my college, and the days though less dark were no less laborious.
Then when the 'end' had at last been reached the whole story had to berevised, and indeed largely re-written backwards. And it had to be typed, andre-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by the ten-fingered wasbeyond my means.
_The Lord of the Rings_ has been read by many people since it finallyappeared in print; and I should like to say something here with reference tothe many opinions or guesses that I have received or have read concerning themotives and meaning of the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a taleteller
to try his hand at a really long story that would hold the attention ofreaders, amuse them, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeplymove them. As a guide I had only my own feelings for what is appealing or

moving, and for many the guide was inevitably often at fault. Some who haveread the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have found it boring, absurd,
or contemptible; and I have no cause to complain, since I have similaropinions of their works, or of the kinds of writing that they evidentlyprefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed my storythere is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible in a long taleto please everybody at all points, nor to displease everybody at the samepoints; for I find from the letters that I have received that the passages orchapters that are to some a blemish are all by others specially approved. Themost critical reader of all, myself, now finds many defects, minor and major,
but being fortunately under no obligation either to review the book or towrite it again, he will pass over these in silence, except one that has beennoted by others: the book is too short.
As for any inner meaning or 'message', it has in the intention of theauthor none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. As the story grew it putdown roots (into the past) and threw out unexpected branches: but its maintheme was settled from the outset by the inevitable choice of the Ring as thelink between it and _The Hobbit._ The crucial chapter, "The Shadow of thePast', is one of the oldest parts of the tale. It was written long before theforeshadow of 1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and fromthat point the story would have developed along essentially the same lines, ifthat disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before in mind, orin some cases already written, and little or nothing in it was modified by thewar that began in 1939 or its sequels.
The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its process or itsconclusion. If it had inspired or directed the development of the legend, thencertainly the Ring would have been seized and used against Sauron; he wouldnot have been annihilated but enslaved, and Barad-d.r would not have beendestroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, wouldm the confusion and treacheries of the time have found in Mordor the missinglinks in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would have madea Great Ring of his own with which to challenge the self-styled Ruler ofMiddle-earth. In that conflict both sides would have held hobbits in hatred
and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves.
Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastes or views ofthose who like allegory or topical reference. But I cordially dislike allegoryin all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old and waryenough to detect its presence. I much prefer history, true or feigned, withits varied applicability to the thought and experience of readers. I thinkthat many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but the one resides in thefreedom of the reader, and the other in the purposed domination of the author.
An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experience,
but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremelycomplex, and attempts to define the process are at best guesses from evidencethat is inadequate and ambiguous. It is also false, though naturallyattractive, when the lives of an author and critic have overlapped, to supposethat the movements of thought or the events of times common to both werenecessarily the most powerful influences. One has indeed personally to comeunder the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but as the years go byit seems now often forgotten that to be caught in youth by 1914 was no lesshideous an experience than to be involved in 1939 and the following years. By1918 all but one of my close friends were dead. Or to take a less grievousmatter: it has been supposed by some that 'The Scouring of the Shire' reflectsthe situation in England at the time when I was finishing my tale. It doesnot. It is an essential part of the plot, foreseen from the outset, though inthe event modified by the character of Saruman as developed in the storywithout, need I say, any allegorical significance or contemporary politicalreference whatsoever. It has indeed some basis in experience, though slender(for the economic situation was entirely different), and much further back.
The country in which I lived in childhood was being shabbily destroyed before

I was ten, in days when motor-cars were rare objects (I had never seen one)
and men were still building suburban railways. Recently I saw in a paper apicture of the last decrepitude of the once thriving corn-mill beside its poolthat long ago seemed to me so important. I never liked the looks of the Youngmiller, but his father, the Old miller, had a black beard, and he was notnamed Sandyman.
_The Lord of the Rings_ is now issued in a new edition, and theopportunity has been taken of revising it. A number of errors andinconsistencies that still remained in the text have been corrected, and anattempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentivereaders have raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, andif some seem to have been passed over that may be because I have failed tokeep my notes in order; but many enquiries could only be answered byadditional appendices, or indeed by the production of an accessory volumecontaining much of the material that I did not include in the originaledition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantimethis edition offers this Foreword, an addition to the Prologue, some notes,
and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in intentioncomplete in items but not in references, since for the present purpose it hasbeen necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of thematerial prepared for me by Mrs. N. Smith, belongs rather to the accessoryvolume.
PROLOGUE
This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its pages a reader maydiscover much of their character and a little of their history. Furtherinformation will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of Westmarch
that has already been published, under the title of _The Hobbit_. That storywas derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed by Bilbohimself, the first Hobbit to become famous in the world at large, and calledby him _There and Back Again,_ since they told of his journey into the Eastand his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits in the greatevents of that Age that are here related.
Many, however, may wish to know more about this remarkable people fromthe outset, while some may not possess the earlier book. For such readers afew notes on the more important points are here collected from Hobbit-lore,
and the first adventure is briefly recalled.
Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more numerousformerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and good tilledearth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt.
They do not and did not understand or like machines more complicated than aforge-bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though they were skilful withtools. Even in ancient days they were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', asthey call us, and now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to find.
They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined to befat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless nimble and deft intheir movements. They possessed from the first the art of disappearing swiftlyand silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to meet come blunderingby; and this an they have developed until to Men it may seem magical. ButHobbits have never, in fact, studied magic of any kind, and their elusivenessis due solely to a professional skill that heredity and practice, and a closefriendship with the earth, have rendered inimitable by bigger and clumsierraces.
For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less tout and stocky,
that is, even when they are not actually much shorter. Their height is

variable, ranging between two and four feet of our measure. They seldom nowreach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they say, and in ancient days theywere taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took (Bullroarer), son ofIsengrim the Second, was four foot five and able to ride a horse. He wassurpassed in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of old; but thatcurious matter is dealt with in this book.
As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are concerned, inthe days of their peace and prosperity they were a merry folk. They dressed inbright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green; but they seldom woreshoes, since their feet had tough leathery soles and were clad in a thickcurling hair, much like the hair of their heads, which was commonly brown.
Thus, the only craft little practised among them was shoe-making; but they hadlong and skilful fingers and could make many other useful and comely things.
Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather than beautiful, broad, bright-
eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to laughter, and to eating and drinking.
And laugh they did, and eat, and drink, often and heartily, being fond ofsimple jests at all times, and of six meals a day (when they could get them).
They were hospitable and delighted in parties, and in presents, which theygave away freely and eagerly accepted.
It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits arerelatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of oldthey spoke the languages of Men, after their own fashion, and liked anddisliked much the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship iscan no longer be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in theElder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves still preserve anyrecords of that vanished time, and their traditions are concerned almostentirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom and Hobbits arenot mentioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in fact, lived quietlyin Middle-earth for many long years before other folk became even aware ofthem. And the world being after all full of strange creatures beyond count,
these little people seemed of very little importance. But in the days ofBilbo, and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, by no wish of their own,
both important and renowned, and troubled the counsels of the Wise and theGreat.
Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past, and theshape of all lands has been changed; but the regions in which Hobbits thenlived were doubtless the same as those in which they still linger: the North-
West of the Old World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the Hobbits inBilbo's time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning (other thangenealogical lore) was far from general among them, but there remained still afew in the older families who studied their own books, and even gatheredreports of old times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Their ownrecords began only after the settlement of the Shire, and their most ancientlegends hardly looked further back than their Wandering Days. It is clear,
nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of their peculiar wordsand customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in the distant past movedwestward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time when they dwelt in theupper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of Greenwood the Great and the MistyMountains. Why they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing of themountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their own accounts speak of themultiplying of Men in the land, and of a shadow that fell on the forest, sothat it became darkened and its new name was Mirkwood.
Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had already becomedivided into three somewhat different breeds: Harfoots, Stoors, andFallohides. The Harfoots were browner of skin, smaller, and shorter, and theywere beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble; andthey preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier inbuild; their feet and hands were larger, and they preferred flat lands andriversides. The Fallohides were fairer of skin and also of hair, and they were

taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of trees and ofwoodlands.
The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient times, and long livedin the foothills of the mountains. They moved westward early, and roamed overEriador as far as Weathertop while the others were still in the Wilderland.
They were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit, and far themost numerous. They were the most inclined to settle in one place, and longestpreserved their ancestral habit of living in tunnels and holes.
The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River Anduin, and wereless shy of Men. They came west after the Harfoots and followed the course ofthe Loudwater southwards; and there many of them long dwelt between Tharbadand the borders of Dunland before they moved north again.
The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They weremore friendly with Elves than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill inlanguage and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting totilling. They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came down the RiverHoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with the other kinds that had precededthem, but being somewhat bolder and more adventurous, they were often found asleaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even in Bilbo's timethe strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the greater families,
such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland.
In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains and theMountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a remnantstill dwelt there of the D~nedain, the kings of Men that came over the Sea outof Westernesse; but they were dwindling fast and the lands of their NorthKingdom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room and to spare forincomers, and ere long the Hobbits began to settle in ordered communities.
Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been forgotten inBilbo's time; but one of the first to become important still endured, thoughreduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood that lay round about,
some forty miles east of the Shire.
It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits learned theirletters and began to write after the manner of the D~nedain, who had in theirturn long before learned the art from the Elves. And in those days also theyforgot whatever languages they had used before, and spoke ever after theCommon Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was current through all thelands of the kings from Arnor to Gondor, and about all the coasts of the Seafrom Belfalas to Lune. Yet they kept a few words of their own, as well astheir own names of months and days, and a great store of personal names out ofthe past.
About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes history with areckoning of years. For it was in the one thousand six hundred and first yearof the Third Age that the Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set out fromBree; and having obtained permission from the high king at Fornost, theycrossed the brown river Baranduin with a great following of Hobbits. Theypassed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been built in the days of thepower of the North Kingdom, and they took ail the land beyond to dwell in,
between the river and the Far Downs. All that was demanded of them was that
they should keep the Great Bridge in repair, and all other bridges and roads,
speed the king's messengers, and acknowledge his lordship.
Thus began the _Shire-reckoning,_ for the year of the crossing of theBrandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) became Year One of the Shire, andall later dates were reckoned from it. At once the western Hobbits fell in
love with their new land, and they remained there, and soon passed once moreout of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still a king they werein name his subjects, but they were, in fact, ruled by their own chieftainsand meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To the last battle at
Fornost with the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen to the aid of theking, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record it. But in that warthe North Kingdom ended; and then the Hobbits took the land for their own, and

they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the authority of the kingthat was gone. There for a thousand years they were little troubled by wars,
and they prospered and multiplied after the Dark Plague (S.R. 37) until thedisaster of the Long Winter and the famine that followed it. Many thousandsthen perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) were at the time of this talelong past and the Hobbits had again become accustomed to plenty. The land wasrich and kindly, and though it had long been deserted when they entered it, ithad before been well tilled, and there the king had once had many farms,
cornlands, vineyards, and woods.
Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge,
and fifty from the northern moors to the marshes in the south. The Hobbitsnamed it the Shire, as the region of the authority of their Thain, and adistrict of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant comer of theworld they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded lessand less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to thinkthat peace and plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the right of allsensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of theGuardians, and of the labours of those that made possible the long peace ofthe Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased to remember it.
At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they had neverfought among themselves. In olden days they had, of course, been often obligedto fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time that wasvery ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeed theonly one that had ever been fought within the borders of the Shire, was beyondliving memory: the Battle of Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Tookrouted an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and the wolvesthat had once come ravening out of the North in bitter white winters were nowonly a grandfather's tale. So, though there was still some store of weapons inthe Shire, these were used mostly as trophies, hanging above hearths or onwalls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving. The Mathom-house it wascalled; for anything that Hobbits had no immediate use for, but were unwillingto throw away, they called a _mathom_. Their dwellings were apt to becomerather crowded with mathoms, and many of the presents that passed from hand tohand were of that son.
Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough.
They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they were,
perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good things not least because they could,
when put to it, do without them, and could survive rough handling by grief,
foe, or weather in a way that astonished those who did not know them well andlooked no further than their bellies and their well-fed faces. Though slow toquarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty at bay,
and at need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, for theywere keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows. If anyHobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get quickly under cover, as alltrespassing beasts knew very well.
All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or so theybelieved, and in such dwellings they still felt most at home; but in thecourse of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actuallyin the Shire in Bilbo's days it was, as a rule, only the richest and thepoorest Hobbits that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living inburrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, with only one window ornone; while the well-to-do still constructed more luxurious versions of thesimple diggings of old. But suitable sites for these large and ramifyingtunnels (or _smials_ as they called them) were not everywhere to be found; andin the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as they multiplied,
began to build above ground. Indeed, even in the hilly regions and the oldervillages, such as Hobbiton or Tuckborough, or in the chief township of theShire, Michel Delving on the White Downs, there were now many houses of wood,
brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by millers, smiths, ropers, andcartwrights, and others of that sort; for even when they had holes to live in.

Hobbits had long been accustomed to build sheds and workshops.
The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun amongthe inhabitants of the Marish down by the Brandywine. The Hobbits of thatquarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they woredwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were well known to be Stoors in a largepart of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on theirchins. No Harfoot or Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the folk ofthe Marish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they afterwardsoccupied, came for the most part later into the Shire up from south-away; andthey still had many peculiar names and strange words not found elsewhere inthe Shire.
It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside,
was derived from the D~nedain. But the Hobbits may have learned it direct fromthe Elves, the teachers of Men in their youth. For the Elves of the HighKindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that timeat the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within reach of theShire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen on the TowerHills beyond the western marches. They shone far off in the moonlight. Thetallest was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. The Hobbits ofthe Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop of that tower;
but no Hobbit had ever been known to climb it. Indeed, few Hobbits had everseen or sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever returned to report it.
Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats with deep misgivings, andnot many of them could swim. And as the days of the Shire lengthened theyspoke less and less with the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustfulof those that had dealings with them; and the Sea became a word of fear amongthem, and a token of death, and they turned their faces away from the hills inthe west.
The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbitsused it in their own fashion. They did not go in for towers. Their houses wereusually long, low, and comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no more thanbuilt imitations of _smials,_ thatched with dry grass or straw, or roofed withturves, and having walls somewhat bulged. That stage, however, belonged to theearly days of the Shire, and hobbit-building had long since been altered,
improved by devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by themselves. Apreference for round windows, and even round doors, was the chief remainingpeculiarity of hobbit-architecture.
The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large, and inhabitedby large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors veryexceptional, as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendshipwith the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, orthe Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives lived in(comparative) peace together in one ancestral and many-tunnelled mansion. AllHobbits were, in any case, clannish and reckoned up their relationships withgreat care. They drew long and elaborate family-trees with innumerablebranches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is relatedto whom, and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out afamily-tree that included even the more important members of the moreimportant families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogicaltrees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small book in themselves,
and all but Hobbits would find them exceedingly dull. Hobbits delighted insuch things, if they were accurate: they liked to have books filled withthings that they already knew, set out fair and square with no contradictions.
There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that must bementioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or inhaled, through pipes of

clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of a herb, which they called_pipe-weed_ or _leaf,_ a variety probably of _Nicotiana._ A great deal ofmystery surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or 'art' as the Hobbitspreferred to call it. All that could be discovered about it in antiquity wasput together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since heand the tobacco of the Southfarthing play a part in the history that follows,
his remarks in the introduction to his _Herblore of the Shire_ may be quoted.
'This,' he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be ourown invention. When Hobbits first began to smoke is not known, all the legendsand family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire smokedvarious herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that ToboldHornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew the true pipe-weed inhis gardens in the days of Isengrim the Second, about the year 1070 of Shire-
reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district, especially thevarieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and Southern Star.
'How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day hewould not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is saidthat in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never wentfurther from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned ofthis plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south slopesof the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual smokers of
the pipe-weed. They claim, of course, to have done everything before thepeople of the Shire, whom they refer to as "colonists"; but in this case theirclaim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was from Bree that theart of smoking the genuine weed spread in the recent centuries among Dwarvesand such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, as still passed to andfro through that ancient road-meeting. The home and centre of the an is thusto be found in the old inn of Bree, _The Prancing Pony,_ that has been kept bythe family of Butterbur from time beyond record.
'All the same, observations that I have made on my own many journeyssouth have convinced me that the weed itself is not native to our parts of theworld, but came northward from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I suspect,
originally brought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows abundantly inGondor, and there is richer and larger than in the North, where it is neverfound wild, and flourishes only in warm sheltered places like Longbottom. TheMen of Gondor call it _sweet galenas,_ and esteem it only for the fragrance ofits flowers. From that land it must have been carried up the Greenway duringthe long centuries between the coming of Elendil and our own day. But even theD~nedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits first put it into pipes. Noteven the Wizards first thought of that before we did. Though one Wizard that Iknew took up the art long ago, and became as skilful in it as in all otherthings that he put his mind to.'
The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings already referredto. North, South, East, and West; and these again each into a number offolklands, which still bore the names of some of the old leading families,
although by the time of this history these names were no longer found only intheir proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in the Tookland, but thatwas not true of many other families, such as the Bagginses or the Boffins.
Outside the Farthings were the East and West Marches: the Buckland (seebeginning of Chapter V, Book I); and the Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R.
1462.
The Shire at this time had hardly any 'government'. Families for the mostpart managed their own affairs. Growing food and eating it occupied most oftheir time. In other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not greedy,
but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, workshops, and smalltrades tended to remain unchanged for generations.
There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning the high kingat Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But there

had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and even the ruins of Kings'Norbury were covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits still said of wild folk andwicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. For theyattributed to the king of old all their essential laws; and usually they keptthe laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said), bothancient and just.
It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the officeof Thain had passed to them (from the Oldbucks) some centuries before, and thechief Took had borne that title ever since. The Thain was the master of the
Shire-moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-in-arms, but asmuster and moot were only held in times of emergency, which no longeroccurred, the Thainship had ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Tookfamily was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained bothnumerous and exceedingly wealthy, and was liable to produce in everygeneration strong characters of peculiar habits and even adventuroustemperament. The latter qualities, however, were now rather tolerated (in therich) than generally approved. The custom endured, nonetheless, of referringto the head of the family as The Took, and of adding to his name, if required,
a number: such as Isengrim the Second, for instance.
The only real official in the Shire at this date was the Mayor of MichelDelving (or of the Shire), who was elected every seven years at the Free Fairon the White Downs at the Lithe, that is at Midsummer. As mayor almost hisonly duty was to preside at banquets, given on the Shire-holidays, whichoccurred at frequent intervals. But the offices of Postmaster and FirstShirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he managed both the MessengerService and the Watch. These were the only Shire-services, and the Messengerswere the most numerous, and much the busier of the two. By no means allHobbits were lettered, but those who were wrote constantly to all theirfriends (and a selection of their relations) who lived further off than anafternoon's walk.
The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their police, or thenearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms (suchthings being quite unknown), only a feather in their caps; and they were inpractice rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the strayings ofbeasts than of people. There were in all the Shire only twelve of them, threein each Farthing, for Inside Work. A rather larger body, varying at need, wasemployed to 'beat the bounds', and to see that Outsiders of any kind, great orsmall, did not make themselves a nuisance.
At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they were called, hadbeen greatly increased. There were many reports and complaints of strangepersons and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the first signthat all was not quite as it should be, and always had been except in talesand legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even Bilbo yet had anynotion of what it portended. Sixty years had passed since he set out on hismemorable journey, and he was old even for Hobbits, who reached a hundred asoften as not; but much evidently still remained of the considerable wealththat he had brought back. How much or how little he revealed to no one, noteven to Frodo his favourite 'nephew'. And he still kept secret the ring thathe bad found.
As is told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo's door the greatWizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed,
than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and his twelve companions inexile. With them he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning ofApril, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of greattreasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor inDale, far off in the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon thatguarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle ofFive Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of renown weredone, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned more

than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an 'accident' by theway. The party was assailed by Orcs in a high pass of the Misty Mountains asthey went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was lost for awhile in the black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he gropedin vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the floor of atunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck.
Trying to find his way out. Bilbo went on down to the roots of themountains, until he could go no further. At the bottom of the tunnel lay acold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the water livedGollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with hislarge flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching blind fish withhis long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate any living thing, even orc, ifhe could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a secrettreasure that had come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light:
a ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one thing he loved,
his 'precious', and he talked to it, even when it was not with him. For hekept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he was hunting orspying on the ores of the mines.
Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on himwhen they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his hand an Elvishknife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo tothe Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo could not guess,
then he would kill him and eat him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then he woulddo as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.
Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on norback. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles.
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; forhe was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand cameupon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten: _What haw I got in my pocket?_
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses.
The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question was a mere'question' and not a 'riddle' according to the strict rules of the Game; butall agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, Gollum wasbound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; for the thoughtcame to him that this slimy creature might prove false, even though suchpromises were held sacred, and of old all but the wickedest things feared tobreak them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart was black, andtreachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to the island, of whichBilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark water. There, he thought, lay hisring. He was hungry now, and angry, and once his 'precious' was with him hewould not fear any weapon at all.
But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was gone. Hisscreech sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he did not yet understand whathad happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. _What has itgot in its pocketses?_ he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green flameas he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'. Just in timeBilbo saw his peril, and he fled blindly up the passage away from the water;
and once more he was saved by his luck. For just as he ran he put his hand inhis pocket, and the ring slipped quietly on to his finger. So it was thatGollum passed him without seeing him, and went to guard the way out, lest the'thief' should escape. Warily Bilbo followed him, as he went along, cursing,
and talking to himself about his 'precious'; from which talk at last evenBilbo guessed the truth, and hope came to him in the darkness: he himself hadfound the marvellous ring and a chance of escape from the orcs and fromGollum.
At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to thelower gates of the mines, on the eastward side of the mountains. There Gollumcrouched at bay, smelling and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to slay himwith his sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, in which hisonly hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill the wretched creature at a

disadvantage. In the end, gathering his courage, he leaped over Gollum in thedark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by his enemy's cries of hate anddespair: _Thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it for ever!_
Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first toldit to his companions. To them his account was that Gollum had promised to givehim a _present,_ if he won the game; but when Gollum went to fetch it from hisisland he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been given tohim long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the very ring thathe had found, and as he had won the game, it was already his by right. Butbeing in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him theway out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo set down in hismemoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not even after theCouncil of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the original Red Book, as itdid in several of the copies and abstracts. But many copies contain the trueaccount (as an alternative), derived no doubt from notes by Frodo or Samwise,
both of whom learned the truth, though they seem to have been unwilling todelete anything actually written by the old hobbit himself.
Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heardit, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got thetrue tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while strainedtheir friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth important. Thoughhe did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and disturbing, tofind that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the first: quitecontrary to his habit. The idea of a 'present' was not mere hobbitlikeinvention, all the same. It was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, byGollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his'birthday present', many times. That also Gandalf thought strange andsuspicious; but he did not discover the truth in this point for many moreyears, as will be seen in this book.
Of Bilbo's later adventures little more need be said here. With the helpof the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at the gate and rejoined hiscompanions. He used the ring many times on his quest, chiefly for the help ofhis friends; but he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After hisreturn to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf andFrodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, or so he believed.
Only to Frodo did he show the account of his Journey that he was writing.
His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his coat ofmarvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he lent to amuseum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer atBag End the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the ring,
secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket.
He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-secondyear (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in the Shire until Mr.
Baggins began the preparations for the celebration of his hundred-and-eleventhbirthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History begins.
At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the greatevents that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the Reunited Kingdom awakenedamong them a more widespread interest in their own history; and many of theirtraditions, up to that time still mainly oral, were collected and Writtendown. The greater families were also concerned with events in the Kingdom atlarge, and many of their members studied its ancient histories and legends. Bythe end of the first century of the Fourth Age there were already to be foundin the Shire several libraries that contained many historical books andrecords.
The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at GreatSmials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of the end of the Third Age is drawnmainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important source for the

history of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long preserved atUndertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, Wardens of the Westmarch. It was inorigin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodobrought it back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes, andduring S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his account of the War. Butannexed to it and preserved with it, probably m a single red case, were thethree large volumes, bound in red leather, that Bilbo gave to him as a partinggift. To these four volumes there was added in Westmarch a fifth containingcommentaries, genealogies, and various other matter concerning the hobbitmembers of the Fellowship.
The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies were made,
especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the childrenof Master Samwise. The most important copy, however, has a different history.
It was kept at Great Smials, but it was written in Condor, probably at therequest of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A.
172). Its southern scribe appended this note: Findegil, King's Writer,
finished this work in IV 172. It is an exact copy in all details of theThain's Book m Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request of KingElessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was brought to him by theThain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64.
The Thain's Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book andcontained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received
much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, andquotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviatedversion of those parts of _The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen_ which lie outsidethe account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written byBarahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of theKing. But the chief importance of Findegil's copy is that it alone containsthe whole of Bilbo's 'Translations from the Elvish'. These three volumes were
found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, between 1403 and1418, he had used all the sources available to him in Rivendell, both livingand written. But since they were little used by Frodo, being almost entirelyconcerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here.
Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their great families, andat the same time kept up their connexions with Rohan and Gondor, the librariesat Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did not appear in the RedBook. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with Eriador and thehistory of Rohan. Some of these were composed or begun by Meriadoc himself,
though in the Shire he was chiefly remembered for his _Herblore of the Shire,_
and for his _Reckoning of Years_ m which he discussed the relation of thecalendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, Gondor, and Rohan. Healso wrote a short treatise on _Old Words and Names in the Shire,_ havingspecial interest in discovering the kinship with the language of the Rohirrimof such 'shire-words' as _mathom_ and old elements in place names.
At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire-folk, thoughmore important for larger history. None of them was written by Peregrin, buthe and his successors collected many manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor:
mainly copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to Elendil and hisheirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found extensive materials for thehistory of N~menor and the arising of Sauron. It was probably at Great Smialsthat _The Tale of Years_ was put together, with the assistance of materialcollected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are often conjectural,
especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It is probable thatMeriadoc obtained assistance and information from Rivendell, which he visitedmore than once. There, though Elrond had departed, his sons long remained,
together with some of the High-elven folk. It is said that Celeborn went todwell there after the departure of Galadriel; but there is no record of theday when at last he sought the Grey Havens, and with him went the last livingmemory of the Elder Days in Middle-earth.

THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING
_being the first part of
The Lord of the Rings_
BOOK I
_Chapter 1_
A Long-expected Party
When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he would shortly becelebrating his eleventy-first birthday with a party of special magnificence,
there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton.
Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of theShire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable disappearance and unexpectedreturn. The riches he had brought back from his travels had now become a locallegend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk might say, thatthe Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with treasure. And if that wasnot enough for fame, there was also his prolonged vigour to marvel at. Timewore on, but it seemed to have little effect on Mr. Baggins. At ninety he wasmuch the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they began to call him _well_-
preserved, but _unchanged_ would have been nearer the mark. There were somethat shook their heads and thought this was too much of a good thing; itseemed unfair that anyone should possess (apparently) perpetual youth as wellas (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth.
'It will have to be paid for,' they said. 'It isn't natural, and troublewill come of it!'
But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was generous with hismoney, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his goodfortune. He remained on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of course,
the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among the hobbitsof poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until some ofhis younger cousins began to grow up.
The eldest of these, and Bilbo's favourite, was young Frodo Baggins. WhenBilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to liveat Bag End; and the hopes of the Sackville-Bagginses were finally dashed.
Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same birthday, September 22nd. 'You hadbetter come and live here, Frodo my lad,' said Bilbo one day; 'and then we cancelebrate our birthday-parties comfortably together.' At that time Frodo wasstill in his _tweens,_ as the hobbits called the irresponsible twentiesbetween childhood and coming of age at thirty-three.
Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had given very livelycombined birthday-parties at Bag End; but now it was understood that somethingquite exceptional was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was going to be_eleventy-one,_ 111, a rather curious number and a very respectable age for ahobbit (the Old Took himself had only reached 130); and Frodo was going to be_thirty-three,_ 33) an important number: the date of his 'coming of age'.
Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the comingevent travelled all over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. BilboBaggins became once again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folksuddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand.
No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee, commonly knownas the Gaffer. He held forth at _The Ivy Bush_, a small inn on the Bywater

road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden at BagEnd for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job before that.
Now that he was himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job wasmainly carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were onvery friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill itself, inNumber 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.
'A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I've alwayssaid,' the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite tohim, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting him constantly upon thegrowing of vegetables 每 in the matter of 'roots', especially potatoes, theGaffer was recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbourhood(including himself).
'But what about this Frodo that lives with him?' asked Old Noakes of
Bywater. 'Baggins is his name, but he's more than half a Brandybuck, they say.
It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife awaythere in Buckland, where folks are so queer.'
'And no wonder they're queer,' put in Daddy Twofoot (the Gaffer's next-
door neighbour), 'if they live on the wrong side of the Brandywine River, andright agin the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half the tales betrue.'
'You're right, Dad!' said the Gaffer. 'Not that the Brandybucks of Buckland
live _in_ the Old Forest; but they're a queer breed, seemingly. They foolabout with boats on that big river 每 and that isn't natural. Small wonder thattrouble came of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a younghobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, and in more thanlooks. After all his father was a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr.
Drogo Baggins; there was never much to tell of him, till he was drownded.'
'Drownded?' said several voices. They had heard this and other darkerrumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for family history, andthey were ready to hear it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer. 'Yousee: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was our Mr.
Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest ofthe Old Took's daughters); and Mr. Drogo was his second cousin. So Mr. Frodois his first _and_ second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying is,
if you follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with his father-in-
law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did after his marriage (him beingpartial to his vittles, and old Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); andhe went out _boating_on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife weredrownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. '
'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' saidOld Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.'
'And _I_ heard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after him,' saidSandyman, the Hobbiton miller.
'You shouldn't listen to all you hear, Sandyman,' said the Gaffer, whodid not much like the miller. 'There isn't no call to go talking of pushingand pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit still withoutlooking further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodoleft an orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer Bucklanders,
being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by all accounts. OldMaster Gorbadoc never had fewer than a couple of hundred relations in theplace. Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he brought the lad back tolive among decent folk.
'But I reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. Theythought they were going to get Bag End, that time when he went off and wasthought to be dead. And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes onliving and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly heproduces an heir, and has all the papers made out proper. The Sackville-
Bagginses won't never see the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hopednot.'
'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a

stranger, a visitor on business from Michel Delving in the Westfarthing. 'Allthe top of your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and silver,
_and_jools, by what I've heard. '
'Then you've heard more than I can speak to,' answered the Gaffer. I knownothing about _jools._ Mr. Bilbo is free with his money, and there seems nolack of it; but I know of no tunnel-making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came back,
a matter of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. I'd not long come prentice toold Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag End helpinghim to keep folks from trampling and trapessing all over the garden while thesale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill with apony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I don't doubt they weremostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign parts, where there bemountains of gold, they say; but there wasn't enough to fill tunnels. But mylad Sam will know more about that. He's in and out of Bag End. Crazy aboutstories of the old days he is, and he listens to all Mr. Bilbo's tales. Mr.
Bilbo has learned him his letters 每 meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope noharm will come of it.
_'Elves and Dragons'_ I says to him. '_Cabbages and potatoes are betterfor me and you. Don't go getting mixed up in the business of your betters, oryou'll land in trouble too big for you,'_I says to him. And I might say it toothers,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of Bilbo'swealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of the younger generation ofhobbits.
'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,'
argued the miller, voicing common opinion. 'He's often away from home. Andlook at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and thatold wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all. You can say what you like, Gaffer,
but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.'
'And you can say _what you_ like, about what you know no more of than youdo of boating, Mr. Sandyman,' retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller evenmore than usual. If that's being queer, then we could do with a bit morequeerness in these parts. There's some not far away that wouldn't offer a pintof beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden walls. But they dothings proper at Bag End. Our Sam says that _everyone's_ going to be invitedto the party, and there's going to be presents, mark you, presents for all 每
this very month as is.'
That very month was September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or twolater a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable Sam) was spread aboutthat there were going to be fireworks 每 fireworks, what is more, such as hadnot been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed since the OldTook died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon laden withodd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hillto Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. Itwas driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long beardsand deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End. At the end of the secondweek in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of theBrandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all alone. Hewore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver scarf. He had along white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond the brim of his hat.
Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right up thehill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly guessed. At Bilbo's frontdoor the old man began to unload: there were great bundles of fireworks of allsorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red G and the elf-rune, .
That was Gandalf's mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf theWizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to his skill with fires,
smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difficult and dangerous,

but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one of the'attractions' at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children. 'Gfor Grand!' they shouted, and the old man smiled. They knew him by sight,
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; butneither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had seen one of hisfirework displays 每 they now belonged to the legendary past.
When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had finishedunloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or crackerwas forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.
'Run away now!' said Gandalf. 'You will get plenty when the time comes.'
Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was shut. The younghobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and then made off, feelingthat the day of the party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window of asmall room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon was brightand peaceful. The flowers glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and sun-flowers,
and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in at the roundwindows.
'How bright your garden looks!' said Gandalf.
'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear oldShire; but I think I need a holiday.'
'You mean to go on with your plan then?'
'I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven't changed it.'
'Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan 每 yourwhole plan, mind 每 and I hope it will turn out for the best, for you, and forall of us.'
'I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have my little
joke.'
'Who will laugh, I wonder?' said Gandalf, shaking his head.
'We shall see,' said Bilbo.
The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. Theremight have been some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very weekorders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind of provision, commodity, orluxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in theneighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off the dayson the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping forinvitations.
Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton post-
office was blocked, and the Bywater post-office was snowed under, andvoluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a constant stream ofthem going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on _Thank you,
I shall certainly come._
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT ON PARTYBUSINESS. Even those who had, or pretended to have Party Business were seldomallowed inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off answers,
packing up presents, and making some private preparations of his own. From thetime of Gandalf's arrival he remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south of Bilbo'sfront door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A specialentrance was cut into the bank leading to the road, and wide steps and a largewhite gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,
adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally envied. OldGaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden.
The tents began to go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so bigthat the tree that grew in the field was right inside it, and stood proudlynear one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all itsbranches. More promising still (to the hobbits' mind): an enormous open-airkitchen was erected in the north corner of the field. A draught of cooks, from

every inn and eating-house for miles around, arrived to supplement the dwarvesand other odd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to itsheight.
Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve of theParty. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday, September the 22nd, actuallydawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun
began.
Bilbo Baggins called it a _party,_ but it was really a variety ofentertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living near was invited.
A very few were overlooked by accident, but as they turned up all the same,
that did not matter. Many people from other parts of the Shire were alsoasked; and there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo met theguests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away presentsto all and sundry 每 the latter were those who went out again by a back way andcame in again by the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their ownbirthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not so lavishly as on thisoccasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater everyday in the year it was somebody's birthday, so that every hobbit in thoseparts had a fair chance of at least one present at least once a week. But theynever got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbit-childrenwere so excited that for a while they almost forgot about eating. There weretoys the like of which they had never seen before, all beautiful and someobviously magical. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, and hadcome all the way from the Mountain and from Dale, and were of real dwarf-make.
When every guest had been welcomed and was finally inside the gate, therewere songs, dances, music, games, and, of course, food and drink. There werethree official meals: lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But lunch and teawere marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the guests weresitting down and eating together. At other times there were merely lots ofpeople eating and drinking 每 continuously from elevenses until six-thirty,
when the fireworks started.
The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by him, butdesigned and made by him; and the special effects, set pieces, and flights ofrockets were let off by him. But there was also a generous distribution ofsquibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles, elf-
fountains, goblin-barkers and thunder-claps. They were all superb. The art ofGandalf improved with age.
There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing withsweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leavesopened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branchesdropped glowing flowers down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with asweet scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There werefountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; there werepillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into eagles, or sailing ships,
or a phalanx of flying swans; there was a red thunderstorm and a shower ofyellow rain; there was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into theair with a yell like an embattled army, and came down again into the Waterwith a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there was also one last surprise,
in honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalfintended. The lights went out. A great smoke went up. It shaped itself like amountain seen in the distance, and began to glow at the summit. It spoutedgreen and scarlet flames. Out flew a red-golden dragon 每 not life-size, butterribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his eyes glared down; there was aroar, and he whizzed three times over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked,
and many fell flat on their faces. The dragon passed like an express train,
turned a somersault, and burst over Bywater with a deafening explosion.
'That is the signal for supper!' said Bilbo. The pain and alarm vanishedat once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to their feet. There was a splendidsupper for everyone; for everyone, that is, except those invited to the

special family dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with thetree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called bythe hobbits one Gross, though the word was not considered proper to use ofpeople); and the guests were selected from all the families to which Bilbo andFrodo were related, with the addition of a few special unrelated friends (suchas Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and present by parentalpermission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in the matter ofsitting up late, especially when there was a chance of getting them a freemeal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender.
There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many Tooks andBrandybucks; there were various Grubbs (relations of Bilbo Baggins'grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and aselection of Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies,
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly connectedwith Bilbo, and some of them had hardly ever been in Hobbiton before, as theylived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were notforgotten. Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo anddetested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, written in goldenink, that they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides, their cousin,
Bilbo, had been specializing in food for many years and his table had a highreputation.
All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast;
though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech of their host (aninevitable item). He was liable to drag in bits of what he called poetry; andsometimes, after a glass or two, would allude to the absurd adventures of hismysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a _very_
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied,
and prolonged. The purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughoutthe district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had depleted thestocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did notmatter much.
After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of the company were,
however, now in a tolerant mood, at that delightful stage which they called'filling up the corners'. They were sipping their favourite drinks, andnibbling at their favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. Theywere prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop.
_My dear People,_ began Bilbo, rising in his place. 'Hear! Hear! Hear!'
they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus, seeming reluctant to followtheir own advice. Bilbo left his place and went and stood on a chair under theilluminated tree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming face; thegolden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could all see himstanding, waving one hand in the air, the other was in his trouser-pocket.
_My dear Bagginses and Boffins,_ he began again; _and my dear Tooks andBrandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and Burrowses, and Hornblowers, andBolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots._ 'ProudFEET!'
shouted an elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of course,
was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally furry, andboth were on the table.
_Proudfoots,_ repeated Bilbo. _Also my good Sackville-Bagginses that Iwelcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundred and eleventhbirthday: I am eleventy-one today!_ 'Hurray! Hurray! Many Happy Returns!' theyshouted, and they hammered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing splendidly.
This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.
_I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am._ Deafeningcheers. Cries of _Yes_ (and _No)._ Noises of trumpets and horns, pipes andflutes, and other musical instruments. There were, as has been said, manyyoung hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most ofthem bore the mark DALE on them; which did not convey much to most of thehobbits, but they all agreed they were marvellous crackers. They containedinstruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one

corner some of the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo to havefinished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up animpromptu orchestra, and began a merry dance-tune. Master Everard Took andMiss Melilot Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands began todance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous.
But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, heblew three loud hoots. The noise subsided. _I shall not keep you long,_ hecried. Cheers from all the assembly. _I have called you all together for aPurpose._ Something in the way that he said this made an impression. There wasalmost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears.
_Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I amimmensely fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too short a time tolive among such excellent and admirable hobbits._ Tremendous outburst ofapproval.
_I don't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like lessthan half of you half as well as you deserve._ This was unexpected and ratherdifficult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them were trying towork it out and see if it came to a compliment.
_Secondly, to celebrate my birthday._ Cheers again. _I should say: OURbirthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of my heir and nephew,
Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today._ Some perfunctoryclapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of 'Frodo! Frodo! Jolly oldFrodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered whatwas meant by 'coming into his inheritance'. _Together we score one hundred andforty-four. Your numbers were chosen to fit this remarkable total: One Gross,
if I may use the expression._ No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of hisguests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling surethey had only been asked to fill up the required number, like goods in apackage. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.'
_It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, theanniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though thefact that it was_ my _birthday slipped my memory on that occasion. I was onlyfifty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet was verysplendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and couldonly say 'thag you very buch'. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank you verymuch for coming to my little party._ Obstinate silence. They all feared that asong or some poetry was now imminent; and they were getting bored. Whycouldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo did not singor recite. He paused for a moment.
_Thirdly and finally,_ he said, _I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT_. Hespoke this last word so loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who stillcould. _I regret to announce that 每 though, as I said, eleventy-one years isfar too short a time to spend among you 每 this is the END. I am going. I amleaving NOW. GOOD-BYE!_
He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, andthe guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to beseen. One hundred and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.
Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then there wasa dead silence, until suddenly, after several deep breaths, every Baggins,
Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle,
Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once.
It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and morefood and drink were needed to cure the guests of shock and annoyance. 'He'smad. I always said so,' was probably the most popular comment. Even the Tooks(with a few exceptions) thought Bilbo's behaviour was absurd. For the momentmost of them took it for granted that his disappearance was nothing more thana ridiculous prank.
But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure. Neither age nor an enormousdinner had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter-in-law, Esmeralda:
'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off

again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.'
He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again.
Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time he hadsat silent beside Bilbo's empty chair, and ignored all remarks and questions.
He had enjoyed the joke, of course, even though he had been in the know. Hehad difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant surprise of theguests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: he realized suddenlythat he loved the old hobbit dearly. Most of the guests went on eating anddrinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and present; but theSackville-Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo did not want to haveany more to do with the party. He gave orders for more wine to be served; thenhe got up and drained his own glass silently to the health of Bilbo, andslipped out of the pavilion.
As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, he had beenfingering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic ring that he had keptsecret for so many years. As he stepped down he slipped it on his finger, andhe was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again.
He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment listening witha smile to the din in the pavilion and to the sounds of merrymaking in otherparts of the field. Then he went in. He took off his party clothes, folded upand wrapped in tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and put it away.
Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments, and fastened round his waista worn leather belt. On it he hung a short sword in a battered black-leatherscabbard. From a locked drawer, smelling of moth-balls, he took out an oldcloak and hood. They had been locked up as if they were very precious, butthey were so patched and weatherstained that their original colour couldhardly be guessed: it might have been dark green. They were rather too largefor him. He then went into his study, and from a large strong-box took out abundle wrapped in old cloths, and a leather-bound manuscript; and also a largebulky envelope. The book and bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bagthat was standing there, already nearly full. Into the envelope he slipped hisgolden ring, and its fine chain, and then sealed it, and addressed it toFrodo. At first he put it on the mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it andstuck it in his pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf camequickly in.
'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.'
'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down in achair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feelthat everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?'
'Yes, I do,' said Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it quitestartled me, let alone the others. A little addition of your own, I suppose?'
It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years, and itseemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem toexplain your sudden vanishment.'
'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughedBilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.'
'I do 每 when I know anything. But I don't feel too sure about this wholeaffair. It has now come to the final point. You have had your joke, andalarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the whole Shiresomething to talk about for nine days, or ninety-nine more likely. Are yougoing any further?'
'Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as I have toldyou before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don't expect I shall return. Infact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements.
'I am old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in myheart of hearts. _Well-preserved_ indeed!' he snorted. 'Why, I feel all thin,
sort of _stretched,_ if you know what I mean: like butter that has beenscraped over too much bread. That can't be right. I need a change, orsomething.'
Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. 'No, it does not seem

right,' he said thoughtfully. 'No, after all I believe your plan is probablythe best.'
'Well, I've made up my mind, anyway. I want to see mountains again,
Gandalf, _mountains,_ and then find somewhere where I can _rest._ In peace andquiet, without a lot of relatives prying around, and a string of confoundedvisitors hanging on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish mybook. I have thought of a nice ending for it: _and he lived happily ever afterto the end of his days. '_
Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, howeverit ends.'
'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far asit has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?'
'Yes, I will 每 two eyes, as often as I can spare them.'
'He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he offered toonce, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet. I want tosee the wild country again before I die, and the Mountains; but he is still inlove with the Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers. He ought to becomfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course, except a fewoddments. I hope he will be happy, when he gets used to being on his own. It'stime he was his own master now.'
'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring as well? You agreed to that, youremember.'
'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.
'Where is it?'
'In an envelope, if you must know,' said Bilbo impatiently. 'There on themantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!' He hesitated. 'Isn't that oddnow?' he said softly to himself. 'Yet after all, why not? Why shouldn't itstay there?'
Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam in hiseyes. 'I think, Bilbo,' he said quietly, 'I should leave it behind. Don't youwant to?'
'Well yes 每 and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it atall, I may say. And I don't really see why I should. Why do you want me to?'
he asked, and a curious change came over his voice. It was sharp withsuspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but youhave never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.'
'No, but I had to badger you,' said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It wasimportant. Magic rings are 每 well, magical; and they are rare and curious. Iwas professionally interested in your ring, you may say; and I still am. Ishould like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think_you_have had it quite long enough. You won't need it any more. Bilbo, unlessI am quite mistaken.'
Bilbo flushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His kindly facegrew hard. 'Why not?' he cried. 'And what business is it of yours, anyway, toknow what I do with my own things? It is my own. I found it. It came to me.'
'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.'
'If I am it is your fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I tell you. My own.
My precious. Yes, my precious.'
The wizard's face remained grave and attentive, and only a flicker in hisdeep eyes showed that he was startled and indeed alarmed. 'It has been calledthat before,' he said, 'but not by you.'
'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It'snot his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.'
Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. 'You will be a fool if you do.
Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has gotfar too much hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and befree.'
'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately.
'Now, now, my dear hobbit! ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we havebeen friends, and you owe me something. Come! Do as you promised: give it up!

'
'Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you won'tget it. I won't give my precious away, I tell you.' His hand strayed to thehilt of his small sword.
Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said.
If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalf the Greyuncloaked.' He took a step towards the hobbit, and he seemed to grow tall andmenacing; his shadow filled the little room.
Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching at hispocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air of the roomtingled. Gandalf's eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly his hands relaxed,
and he began to tremble.
'I don't know what has come over you, Gandalf,' he said. 'You have neverbeen like this before. What is it all about? It is mine isn't it? I found it,
and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not a thief,
whatever he said.'
'I have never called you one,' Gandalf answered. 'And I am not oneeither. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would trustme, as you used.' He turned away, and the shadow passed. He seemed to dwindleagain to an old grey man, bent and troubled.
Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt soqueer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it anymore. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it waslike an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and disappear,
don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to make sure. Itried locking it up, but I found I couldn't rest without it in my pocket. Idon't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.'
'Then trust mine,' said Gandalf. 'It is quite made up. Go away and leaveit behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after him.'
Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. 'Allright,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, andsmiled rather ruefully. 'After all that's what this party business was allabout, really: to give away lots of birthday presents, and somehow make iteasier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in theend, but it would be a pity to waste all my preparations. It would quite spoilthe joke.'
'Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,' saidGandalf.
'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo with all the rest.' He drew adeep breath. 'And now I really must be starting, or somebody else will catchme. I have said good-bye, and I couldn't bear to do it all over again.' Hepicked up his bag and moved to the door.
'You have still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well, soI have!' cried Bilbo. 'And my will and all the other documents too. You hadbetter take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.'
'No, don't give the ring to me,' said Gandalf. 'Put it on themantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait forhim.'
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set it by theclock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the floor. Before he couldpick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set it in its place. A spasmof anger passed swiftly over the hobbit's face again. Suddenly it gave way toa look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said. 'Now I'm off!'
They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick from thestand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different rooms where theyhad been busy.
'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and labelled?'
'Everything,' they answered.
'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door.
It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked

up, sniffing the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the Roadwith dwarves! This is what I have really been longing for, for years! Goodbye!
' he said, looking at his old home and bowing to the door. 'Good-bye,
Gandalf!'
'Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! You are oldenough, and perhaps wise enough.'
'Take care! I don't care. Don't you worry about me! I am as happy now asI have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come. I ambeing swept off my feet at last,' he added, and then in a low voice, as if tohimself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word he turned awayfrom the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his threecompanions went round into his garden, and trotted down the long sloping path.
He jumped over a low place in the hedge at the bottom, and took to themeadows, passing into the night like a rustle of wind in the grass.
Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness.
'Goodbye, my dear Bilbo 每 until our next meeting!' he said softly and wentback indoors.
Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep inthought. 'Has he gone?' he asked.
'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.'
' I wish 每 I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,'
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart that he really meant to go. He always usedto joke about serious things. I wish I had come back sooner, just to see himoff.'
I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,' saidGandalf. 'Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right 每 now. He left a packetfor you. There it is!'
Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it, but didnot open it.
'You'll find his will and all the other documents in there, I think,'
said the wizard. 'You are the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy, you'llfind a golden ring.'
'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still,
it may be useful.'
'It may, and it may not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it, ifI were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.'
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye tothe guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over the field,
but Frodo would only say _no doubt everything will be cleared up in themorning_. About midnight carriages came for the important folk. One by onethey rolled away, filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits. Gardenerscame by arrangement, and removed in wheel-barrows those that had inadvertentlyremained behind.
Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather later. Morningwent on. People came and began (by orders) to clear away the pavilions and thetables and the chairs, and the spoons and knives and bottles and plates, andthe lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and the crumbs and cracker-
paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food(a very small item). Then a number of other people came (without orders):

Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and Tooks, and other guests that lived orwere staying near. By mid-day, when even the best-fed were out and aboutagain, there was a large crowd at Bag End, uninvited but not unexpected.
Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather tired andworried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had not much more to say thanbefore. His reply to all inquiries was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo Baggins hasgone away; as far as I know, for good.' Some of the visitors he invited tocome inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them.
Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of packages andparcels and small articles of furniture. On every item there was a label tied.
There were several labels of this sort:
_For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo,_ on an umbrella. Adelardhad carried off many unlabelled ones.
_For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspondence, with love fromBilbo,_ on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldestsurviving female relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and hadwritten reams of good advice for more than half a century.
_For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B.,_ on a gold penand ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters.
_For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo,_ on a round convex mirror. She wasa young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely.
_For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a contributor,_ on an(empty) book-case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than usual atreturning them.
_For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT,_ on a case of silverspoons. Bilbo believed that she had acquired a good many of his spoons, whilehe was away on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When shearrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she also took thespoons.
This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. Bilbo'sresidence had got rather cluttered up with things in the course of his longlife. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which thecustom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, ofcourse, that the birthday-presents were always _new,_ there were one or twoold _mathoms_ of forgotten uses that had circulated all around the district;
but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and kept those that he received. Theold hole was now being cleared a little.
Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written out personallyby Bilbo, and several had some point, or some joke. But, of course, most ofthe things were given where they would be wanted and welcome. The poorerhobbits, and especially those of Bagshot Row, did very well. Old Gaffer Gamgeegot two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen waistcoat, and a bottle ofointment for creaking joints. Old Rory Brandybuck, in return for muchhospitality, got a dozen bottles of Old Winyards: a strong red wine from theSouthfarthing, and now quite mature, as it had been laid down by Bilbo'sfather. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted him a capital fellow after thefirst bottle.
There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of course, all thechief treasures, as well as the books, pictures, and more than enoughfurniture, were left in his possession. There was, however, no sign normention of money or jewellery: not a penny-piece or a glass bead was givenaway.
Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour that thewhole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and beforelong the place was packed with people who had no business there, but could notbe kept out. Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Somepeople tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make _off_
with minor items not addressed to them, or with anything that seemed unwantedor unwatched. The road to the gate was blocked with barrows and handcarts.
In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo had

retired for a while and left his friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye on
things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.
'He is indisposed,' he said. 'He is resting.'
'Hiding, you mean,' said Lobelia. 'Anyway we want to see him and we meanto see him. Just go and tell him so!'
Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discovertheir parting gift of spoons. It did not improve their tempers. Eventuallythey were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot ofpapers in front of him. He looked indisposed 每 to see Sackville-Bagginses atany rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his pocket. But hespoke quite politely.
The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began by offering himbad bargain-prices (as between friends) for various valuable and unlabelledthings. When Frodo replied that only the things specially directed by Bilbowere being given away, they said the whole affair was very fishy.
'Only one thing is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that is that you aredoing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.'
Otho would have been Bilbo's heir, but for the adoption of Frodo. He readthe will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately, very clear and correct(according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other thingsseven signatures of witnesses in red ink).
'Foiled again!' he said to his wife. 'And after waiting _sixty_ years.
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumpedoff. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came outof the study to see how things were going on and found her still about theplace, investigating nooks and comers and tapping the floors. He escorted herfirmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (butrather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Herface looked as if she was in the throes of thinking out a really crushingparting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:
'You'll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn't you go too? You don'tbelong here; you're no Baggins 每 you 每 you're a Brandybuck!'
'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodoas he shut the door on her.
'It was a compliment,' said Merry Brandybuck, 'and so, of course, nottrue.'
Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits (twoBoffins and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of one of thecellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho Proudfoot (old OdoProudfoot's grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, wherehe thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited bothcuriosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously obtained, if notpositively ill-gotten), is, as every one knows, any one's for the finding 每
unless the search is interrupted.
When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on achair in the hall. It's time to close the shop, Merry,' he said. 'Lock thedoor, and don't open it to anyone today, not even if they bring a batteringram.' Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea.
He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door.
'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of somethingreally nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.'
He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder, but he tookno notice. Suddenly the wizard's head appeared at the window.
'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down yourhole and out through the hill,' he said.
'My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room tothe door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.'
'Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-traptowards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.'

'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo'sring. I longed to disappear.'
'Don't do that!' said Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be careful of that ring,
Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last word.'
'Well, what about it?'
'What do you know already?'
'Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, andhow he used it: on his journey, I mean.'
'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf.
'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'Hetold me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said you hadpestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets betweenus, Frodo," he said; "but they are not to go any further. It's mine anyway."'
'That's interesting,' said Gandalf. 'Well, what did you think of it all?'
'If you mean, inventing all that about a "present", well, I thought thetrue story much more likely, and I couldn't see the point of altering it atall. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I thought it rather odd.'
'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures 每
if they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful with it. Itmay have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.'
'I don't understand,' said Frodo.
'Neither do I,' answered the wizard. 'I have merely begun to wonder aboutthe ring, especially since last night. No need to worry. But if you take myadvice you will use it very seldom, or not at all. At least I beg you not touse it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say again: keepit safe, and keep it secret!'
'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?'
'I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to tell yousomething when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye forthe present.' He got up.
'At once!' cried Frodo. 'Why, I thought you were staying on for at leasta week. I was looking forward to your help.'
'I did mean to 每 but I have had to change my mind. I may be away for agood while; but I'll come and see you again, as soon as I can. Expect me whenyou see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan't often be visiting the Shireopenly again. I find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I am anuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actually accusing me ofspiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is supposed to be aplot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.'
'Some people!' exclaimed Frodo. 'You mean Otho and Lobelia. Howabominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else, if I could getBilbo back and go off tramping in the country with him. I love the Shire. ButI begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever seehim again.'
'So do I,' said Gandalf. 'And I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!
Take care of yourself! Look out for me, especially at unlikely times! Goodbye!'
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walkedoff at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard looked unusuallybent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing in,
and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not seehim again for a long time.
_Chapter 2_
The Shadow of the Past
The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days. The seconddisappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed allover the Shire, for a year and a day, and was remembered much longer than

that. It became a fireside-story for young hobbits; and eventually MadBaggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags ofjewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on longafter all the true events were forgotten.
But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was thatBilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and hadrun off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a riverand come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame was mostly laidon Gandalf.
'If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps he'llsettle down and grow some hobbit-sense,' they said. And to all appearance thewizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the growth ofhobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to carry onBilbo's reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning; and the nextyear he gave a party in honour of Bilbo's hundred-and-twelfth birthday, whichhe called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twentyguests were invited and there were several meals at which it snowed food andrained drink, as hobbits say.
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of givingBilbo's Birthday Party year after year until they got used to it. He said thathe did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked: 'Where is he then?' heshrugged his shoulders.
He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends,
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took) whohad as children been fond of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End. FolcoBoffin and Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends werePeregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real name wasMeriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping all over theShire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the amazementof sensible folk he was sometimes seen far from home walking in the hills andwoods under the starlight. Merry and Pippin suspected that he visited theElves at times, as Bilbo had done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs ofgood 'preservation': outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust andenergetic hobbit just out of his tweens. 'Some folk have all the luck,' theysaid; but it was not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age offifty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master and_the_ Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For some years he was quitehappy and did not worry much about the future. But half unknown to himself theregret that he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found himselfwondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild lands, andstrange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his dreams. Hebegan to say to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day.' Towhich the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.'
So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftiethbirthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehowsignificant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that adventure hadsuddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless, and the old pathsseemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond theiredges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its borders.
He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and Merry andhis other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking and talkingwith the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in the Shire.
There were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside; andas Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for severalyears, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in theShire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no

longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the roadin unusual numbers. The ancient East-West Road ran through the Shire to itsend at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to theirmines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits' chief source of news fromdistant parts 每 if they wanted any: as a rule dwarves said little and hobbitsasked no more. But now Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries,
seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in whispers ofthe Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.
That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past, like ashadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous anddisquieting. It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been driven out bythe White Council only to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholdsof Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. From there the powerwas spreading far and wide, and away far east and south there were wars andgrowing fear. Orcs were multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls wereabroad, no longer dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful weapons.
And there were murmured hints of creatures more terrible than all these, butthey had no name.
Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits. Buteven the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer tales; and thosewhose business took them to the borders saw strange things. The conversationin _The Green Dragon_ at Bywater, one evening in the spring of Frodo'sfiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the Shire rumourshad been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and opposite him wasTed Sandyman, the miller's son; and there were various other rustic hobbitslistening to their talk.
'Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said Sam.
'Ah,' said Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales andchildren's stories at home, if I want to.'
'No doubt you can,' retorted Sam, 'and I daresay there's more truth insome of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories anyway? Take dragonsnow.'
'No thank 'ee,' said Ted, 'I won't. I heard tell of them when I was ayoungster, but there's no call to believe in them now. There's only one Dragonin Bywater, and that's Green,' he said, getting a general laugh.
'All right,' said Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But what about theseTree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that one biggerthan a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.'
'Who's _they_?'
'My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes upto the Northfarthing for the hunting. He _saw_ one.'
'Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal's always saying he's seen things; andmaybe he sees things that ain't there.'
'But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking 每 walking sevenyards to a stride, if it was an inch.'
'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw _was_ an elm tree, as like asnot.'
'But this one was _walking,_ I tell you; and there ain't no elm tree onthe North Moors.'
'Then Hal can't have seen one,' said Ted. There was some laughing andclapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point.
'All the same,' said Sam, 'you can't deny that others besides our Halfasthave seen queer folk crossing the Shire 每 crossing it, mind you: there aremore that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders have never been so busybefore.
'And I've heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they aregoing to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers.' Sam waved his armvaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the

old towers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was an oldtradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens, from which at timeselven-ships set sail, never to return.
'They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into theWest and leaving us,' said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking his headsadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.
'Well, that isn't anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I don'tsee what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! But I warrant you haven'tseen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.'
'Well I don't know,' said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had once seenan Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day. Of all the legendsthat he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and half-
remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always moved himmost deeply. 'There are some, even in these parts, as know the Fair Folk andget news of them,' he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I work for. He toldme that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilboknew more: many's the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.'
'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked,
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where you get your news from, you'll neverwant for moonshine. Well, friends, I'm off home. Your good health!' He drainedhis mug and went out noisily.
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. Forone thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have abusy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But Samhad more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up andwent out.
It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain. The sunwas down, and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into night. He walkedhome under the early stars through Hobbiton and up the Hill, whistling softlyand thoughtfully.
It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long absence.
For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he paid Frodo a briefvisit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again. During the nextyear or two he had turned up fairly often, coming unexpectedly after dusk, andgoing off without warning before sunrise. He would not discuss his ownbusiness and journeys, and seemed chiefly interested in small news aboutFrodo's health and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodohad seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard wouldnever return and had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, asSam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar tapon the study window.
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. Theylooked hard at one another.
'Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!'
'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf lookedolder and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wideworld, and soon they were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with Frodo bythe open window of the study. A bright fire was on the hearth, but the sun waswarm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the newgreen of Spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the trees'fingers.
Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when Bilbohad run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps whiterthan it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer, and hisface more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as bright as ever, andhe smoked and blew smoke-rings with the same vigour and delight.

He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep inthought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidingsthat Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.
'Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring, Gandalf,'
he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters were bestleft until daylight. Don't you think you had better finish now? You say thering is dangerous, far more dangerous than I guess. In what way?'
'In many ways,' answered the wizard. It is far more powerful than I everdared to think at first, so powerful that in the end it would utterly overcomeanyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him.
'In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as you callthem, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more potent and someless. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft before it was full-grown,
and to the Elven-smiths they were but trifles 每 yet still to my mind dangerousfor mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings of Power, they were perilous.
'A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not die, but hedoes not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues, until at last everyminute is a weariness. And if he often uses the Ring to make himselfinvisible, he_ fades:_ he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walksin the twilight under the eye of the dark power that rules the Rings. Yes,
sooner or later 每 later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, butneither strength nor good purpose will last 每 sooner or later the dark powerwill devour him.'
'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The soundof Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.
'How long have you known this?' asked Frodo at length. 'And how much didBilbo know?'
'Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,' said Gandalf. 'He wouldcertainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would be adanger, even though I promised to look after you. He thought the ring was verybeautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong or queer, it washimself. He said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was always worryingabout it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though hehad found out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seem always ofthe same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd way, and mightsuddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.'
'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo, 'so I havealways kept it on its chain.'
'Very wise,' said Gandalf. 'But as for his long life, Bilbo neverconnected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to himself,
and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and uneasy. _Thinand stretched_ he said. A sign that the ring was getting control.'
'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again.
'Known?' said Gandalf. 'I have known much that only the Wise know, Frodo.
But if you mean "known about _this_ ring", well, I still do not _know,_onemight say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.
'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back in memory.
'Let me see 每 it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark powerfrom Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found hisring. A shadow fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I feared.
I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was 每 that atleast was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story of how hehad "won" it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the truth out ofhim, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to the ring beyonddoubt. Much like Gollum with his "birthday present". The lies were too muchalike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had an unwholesome power that set towork on its keeper at once. That was the first real warning I had that all wasnot well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were better left unused; but heresented it, and soon got angry. There was little else that I could do. I

could not take it from him without doing greater harm; and I had no right todo so anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps have consultedSaruman the White, but something always held me back.'
'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.'
'Maybe not,' answered Gandalf. 'Hobbits are, or were, no concern of his.
Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order and the head ofthe Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it, and hetakes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, is hisprovince. He has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their making;
but when the Rings were debated in the Council, all that he would reveal to usof his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept 每 but uneasily.
Still I watched and I waited.
'And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they passed,
and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of age. The shadow fellon me again. But I said to myself: "After all he comes of a long-lived familyon his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!"
'And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He said and didthings then that filled me with a fear that no words of Saruman could allay. Iknew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have spent mostof the years since then in finding out the truth of it.'
'There wasn't any permanent harm done, was there?' asked Frodo anxiously.
'He would get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in peace, Imean?'
'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power inthis world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as Iknow there is no Power in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among theWise I am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch ofknowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, and yetsometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely that some would resistthe Rings far longer than most of the Wise would believe. I don't think youneed worry about Bilbo.
'Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so itmight take a long while for the influence to wear off 每 before it was safe forhim to see it again, for instance. Otherwise, he might live on for years,
quite happily: just stop as he was when he parted with it. For he gave it upin the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not troubled aboutdear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thing go. It is for _you_ that I feelresponsible.
'Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you, and aboutall these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be a grievous blow tothe world, if the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all your kind, jolly,
stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not tomention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.'
Frodo shuddered. 'But why should we be?' he asked. 'And why should hewant such slaves?'
'To tell you the truth,' replied Gandalf, 'I believe that hitherto 每
_hitherto,_mark you 每 he has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits. Youshould be thankful. But your safety has passed. He does not need you 每 he hasmany more useful servants 每 but he won't forget you again. And hobbits asmiserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and free. Thereis such a thing as malice and revenge.'
'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand whatall this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.'
'It has everything to do with it,' said Gandalf. 'You do not know thereal peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was lasthere; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.'
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chainthat hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly to the wizard.
It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in some way

reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.
Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold. 'Can yousee any markings on it?' he asked.
'No,' said Frodo. 'There are none. It is quite plain, and it never showsa scratch or sign of wear.'
'Well then, look!' To Frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard threwit suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. Frodo gave a cryand groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back.
'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look fromunder his bristling brows.
No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got up,
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. The room becamedark and silent, though the clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the windows,
could still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the wizard stoodlooking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to the hearth withthe tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped.
It is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received it on hisshrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever.
'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!'
As Frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest pen-
strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that seemedto form the letters of a flowing script. They shone piercingly bright, and yetremote, as if out of a great depth.
'I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice.
'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancientmode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here. Butthis in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:
_One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them._
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
_Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind themIn the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.'_
He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: 'This is the Master-
ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring that he lost manyages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He greatly desires it 每 but hemust _not_ get it.'
Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast hand,
like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf him. 'Thisring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?'
'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie backin the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If I were totell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when Spring had passedinto Winter.
'But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark Lord. Therumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again and left hishold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the Dark Tower of
Mordor. That name even you hobbits have heard of, like a shadow on the bordersof old stories. Always after a defeat and a respite, the Shadow takes another

shape and grows again.'
'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo.
'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. Butthat is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the
time that is given, us. And already, Frodo, our time is beginning to lookblack. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are far from ripe, Ithink, but they are ripening. We shall be hard put to it. We should be veryhard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance.
'The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge tobeat down all resistance, break the last defences, and cover all the lands ina second darkness. He lacks the One Ring.
'The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and his handnever touched them or sullied them. Seven the Dwarf-kings possessed, but threehe has recovered, and the others the dragons have consumed. Nine he gave toMortal Men, proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago they fell underthe dominion of the One, and they became Ringwraiths, shadows under his greatShadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a year since the Ninewalked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows once more, they too may walkagain. But come! We will not speak of such things even in the morning of theShire.
'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also, orelse they are destroyed. The Three are hidden still. But that no longertroubles him. He only needs the One; for he made that Ring himself, it is his,
and he let a great part of his own former power pass into it, so that he couldrule all the others. If he recovers it, then he will command them all again,
wherever they be, even the Three, and all that has been wrought with them willbe laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever.
'And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One hadperished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been done. But heknows now that it has _not_ perished, that it has been found. So he is seekingit, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on it. It is his great hope andour great fear.'
'Why, why wasn't it destroyed?' cried Frodo. 'And how did the Enemy evercome to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious to him?' Heclutched the Ring in his hand, as if he saw already dark fingers stretchingout to seize it.
'It was taken from him,' said Gandalf. 'The strength of the Elves toresist him was greater long ago; and not all Men were estranged from them. TheMen of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient historywhich it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and gatheringdark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. One day,
perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in full byone who knows it best.
'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how this thingcame to you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that I will say. It wasGil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron, thoughthey themselves perished in the deed; and Isildur Elendil's son cut the Ringfrom Sauron's hand and took it for his own. Then Sauron was vanquished and hisspirit fled and was hidden for long years, until his shadow took shape againin Mirkwood.
'But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, Anduin, andvanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the River,
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, andalmost all his folk were slain. He leaped into the waters, but the Ringslipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed himwith arrows.'
Gandalf paused. 'And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden Fields,' hesaid, 'the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and even so much of itshistory is known now only to a few, and the Council of the Wise could discoverno more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think.

'Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of theGreat River on the edge of Wilderland a clever-handed and quiet-footed littlepeople. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of the fathersof the Stoors, for they loved the River, and often swam in it, or made littleboats of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute, for it was largeand wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother of the folk, sternand wise in old lore, such as they had. The most inquisitive and curious-
minded of that family was called Sm谷agol. He was interested in roots andbeginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed under trees and growingplants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he ceased to look up at the hilltops,
or the leaves on trees, or the flowers opening in the air: his head andhis eyes were downward.
'He had a friend called D谷agol, of similar sort, sharper-eyed but not soquick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the GladdenFields, where there were great beds of iris and flowering reeds. There Sm谷agolgot out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and fished.
Suddenly a great fish took his hook, and before he knew where he was, he wasdragged out and down into the water, to the bottom. Then he let go of hisline, for he thought he saw something shining in the river-bed; and holdinghis breath he grabbed at it.
'Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful ofmud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the mud away, therein his hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in thesun, so that his heart was glad. But Sm谷agol had been watching him from behinda tree, and as Deal gloated over the ring, Sm谷agol came softly up behind.
'"Give us that, Deal, my love," said Sm谷agol, over his friend's shoulder.
'"Why?" said Deal.
' "Because it's my birthday, my love, and I wants it," said Sm谷agol.
'"I don't care," said Deal. "I have given you a present already, morethan I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it."
' "Oh, are you indeed, my love," said Sm谷agol; and he caught Deal by thethroat and strangled him, because the gold looked so bright and beautiful.
Then he put the ring on his finger.
'No one ever found out what had become of Deal; he was murdered far fromhome, and his body was cunningly hidden. But Sm谷agol returned alone; and hefound that none of his family could see him, when he was wearing the ring. Hewas very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it; and he used it tofind out secrets, and he put his knowledge to crooked and malicious uses. Hebecame sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was hurtful. The ring had givenhim power according to his stature. It is not to be wondered at that he becamevery unpopular and was shunned (when visible) by all his relations. Theykicked him, and he bit their feet. He took to thieving, and going aboutmuttering to himself, and gurgling in his throat. So they called him _Gollum,_
and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and his grandmother, desiringpeace, expelled him from the family and turned him out of her hole.
'He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of theworld, and he journeyed up the River, till he came to a stream that floweddown from the mountains, and he went that way. He caught fish in deep poolswith invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as hewas bending over a pool, he felt a burning on the back of his head) and adazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for hehad almost forgotten about the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up andshook his fist at her.
'But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far above the tops of the MistyMountains, out of which the stream came. And he thought suddenly: "It would becool and shady under those mountains. The Sun could not watch me there. Theroots of those mountains must be roots indeed; there must be great secretsburied there which have not been discovered since the beginning."
'So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little

cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggotinto the heart of the hills, and vanished out of all knowledge. The Ring wentinto the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had begun togrow again, could learn nothing of it.'
'Gollum!' cried Frodo. 'Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very Gollumcreature
that Bilbo met? How loathsome!'
'I think it is a sad story,' said the wizard, 'and it might have happenedto others, even to some hobbits that I have known.'
'I can't believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, howeverdistantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!'
'It is true all the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their origins, at anyrate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo's story suggeststhe kinship. There was a great deal in the background of their minds andmemories that was very similar. They understood one another remarkably well,
very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a Dwarf, or an Orc, oreven an Elf. Think of the riddles they both knew, for one thing.'
'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, andof much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat. Gollum meant to cheat all the
time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay itamused his wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him with aneasy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.'
'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else init, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly ruined. Hehad proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed -as a hobbitmight. There was a little corner of his mind that was still his own, and lightcame through it, as through a chink in the dark: light out of the past. It wasactually pleasant, I think, to hear a kindly voice again, bringing up memoriesof wind, and trees, and sun on the grass, and such forgotten things.
'But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier in theend 每 unless it could be conquered. Unless it could be cured.' Gandalf sighed.
'Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no hope. No, not thoughhe possessed the Ring so long, almost as far back as he can remember. For itwas long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness it was seldomneeded. Certainly he had never "faded". He is thin and tough still. But thething was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had become almostunbearable.
'All the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned out to be justempty night: there was nothing more to find out, nothing worth doing, onlynasty furtive eating and resentful remembering. He was altogether wretched. Hehated the dark, and he hated light more: he hated everything, and the Ringmost of all.'
'What do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his precious and theonly thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn't he get rid of it, orgo away and leave it?'
'You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have heard,' saidGandalf. 'He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. He couldnot get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.
'A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. _It_ may slip offtreacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with theidea of handing it on to someone else's care 每 and that only at an earlystage, when it first begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo alone inhistory has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all myhelp, too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast it aside.
It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that decided things. The Ringleft _him.'_
'What, just in time to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an Orc havesuited it better?'
'It is no laughing matter,' said Gandalf. 'Not for you. It was thestrangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo's arrival just

at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.
'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was trying to getback to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him; thenwhen a chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after thatGollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no further use of him: he wastoo small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never leave hisdeep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and sending outhis dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to be picked up bythe most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!
'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of theRing-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was _meant_tofind the Ring, and _not_ by its maker. In which case you also were _meant_tohave it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.'
It is not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure that I understand you. Buthow have you learned all this about the Ring, and about Gollum? Do you reallyknow it all, or are you just guessing still?'
Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much and I havelearned much,' he answered. 'But I am not going to give an account of all mydoings to _you._ The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is knownto all the Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire-writingalone, apart from any other evidence.' 'And when did you discover that?' askedFrodo, interrupting. 'Just now in this room, of course,' answered the wizardsharply. 'But I expected to find it. I have come back from dark journeys andlong search to make that final test. It is the last proof, and all is now onlytoo clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the gap in thehistory, required some thought. I may have started with guesses about Gollum,
but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.'
'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement.
'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I tried long ago;
but I have managed it at last.'
'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?'
'Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was willing to tell
每 though not, of course, in the way I have reported it. Gollum is a liar, andyou have to sift his words. For instance, he called the Ring his "birthdaypresent", and he stuck to that. He said it came from his grandmother, who hadlots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous story. I have no doubtthat Sm谷agol's grandmother was a matriarch, a great person in her way, but totalk of her possessing many Elven-rings was absurd, and as for giving themaway, it was a lie. But a lie with a grain of truth.
'The murder of Deal haunted Gollum, and he had made up a defence,
repeating it to his "precious" over and over again, as he gnawed bones in thedark, until he almost believed it. It _was_ his birthday. Deal ought to havegiven the ring to him. It had previously turned up just so as to be a present.
It _was_ his birthday present, and so on, and on.
I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desperatelyimportant, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him,
and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with much snivellingand snarling. He thought he was misunderstood and ill-used. But when he had atlast told me his history, as far as the end of the Riddle-game and Bilbo'sescape, he would not say any more, except in dark hints. Some other fear wason him greater than mine. He muttered that he was going to gel his own back.
People would see if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a hole andthen _robbed._ Gollum had good friends now, good friends and very strong. Theywould help him. Baggins would pay for it. That was his chief thought. He hatedBilbo and cursed his name. What is more, he knew where he came from.'
'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo.
'Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself; andafter that it would not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum cameout. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than hisfear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year or two he left the

mountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, the Ring was no longerdevouring him; he began to revive a little. He felt old, terribly old, yetless timid, and he was mortally hungry.
'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he alwayswill, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide from daylight andmoonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly by dead of night with his palecold eyes, and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grew stronger andbolder with new food and new air. He found his way into Mirkwood, as one wouldexpect.'
'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo.
'I saw him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wanderedfar, following Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to learn anything from him forcertain, for his talk was constantly interrupted by curses and threats. "Whathad it got in its pocketses?" he said. "It wouldn't say, no precious. Littlecheat. Not a fair question. It cheated first, it did. It broke the rules. Weought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!"
'That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I hadweary days of it. But from hints dropped among the snarls I even gathered thathis padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth, and even to the streets ofDale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great events wentfar and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name and knew where hecame from. We had made no secret of our return journey to his home in theWest. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.'
'Then why didn't he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't hecome to the Shire?'
'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He setout and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But then he turnedaside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure. No, something else drewhim away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me.
'The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trailwas still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and back again it led them, though theynever caught him. The wood was full of the rumour of him, dreadful tales evenamong beasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was some new terrorabroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to find nests; it creptinto holes to find the young; it slipped through windows to find cradles.
'But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wanderedoff southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then Imade a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it mayprove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I had much else tothink of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman.
'Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark anddangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilboleft here. And my search would have been in vain, but for the help that I hadfrom a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age of theworld. Together we sought for Gollum down the whole length of Wilderland,
without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given up the chaseand turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of thegreat perils bringing the miserable creature with him.
'What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and called uscruel, with many a _gollum_ in his throat; and when we pressed him he whinedand cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his fingers as if they painedhim, as if he remembered some old torture. But I am afraid there is nopossible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile bymile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.'
A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating.
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's shears could now beheard.
'Yes, to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them there. The Ring of

the Enemy would leave its mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And allfolk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred ofthe West. There were his fine new friends, who would help him in his revenge!
'Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too much for hiscomfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on the borders he would becaught, and taken 每 for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When hewas found he had already been there long, and was on his way back. On someerrand of mischief. But that does not matter much now. His worst mischief was
done.
'Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the One has been foundagain. He knows where Isildur fell. He knows where Gollum found his ring. Heknows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that it is notone of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endure no evil. Heknows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are accountedfor. He knows that it is the One. And he has at last heard, I think, of_hobbits_ and the _Shire._
'The Shire 每 he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already foundout where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think that the long-
unnoticed name of _Baggins_ has become important.'
'But this is terrible!' cried Frodo. 'Far worse than the worst that I
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am Ito do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo didnot stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!'
'Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strikewithout need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took solittle hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end, because he began hisownership of the Ring so. With Pity.'
'I am sorry,' said Frodo. 'But I am frightened; and I do not feel anypity for Gollum.'
'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in.
'No, and I don't want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do youmean to say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on after all thosehorrible deeds? Now at any rate he is as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. Hedeserves death.'
'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And somethat die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager todeal out death in judgement. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. Ihave not much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is achance of it. And he is bound up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells methat he has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and whenthat comes, the pity of Bilbo may rule the fate of many 每 yours not least. Inany case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. The Wood-elveshave him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as they can find intheir wise hearts.'
'All the same,' said Frodo, 'even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I wishhe had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had not gotit! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn't you make me throw it away, or, ordestroy it?'
'Let you? Make you?' said the wizard. 'Haven't you been listening to allthat I have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying. But as forthrowing it away, that was obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of beingfound. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst of all, it mighthave fallen into the hands of the Enemy. Indeed it certainly would; for thisis the One, and he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it to himself.
'Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that hastroubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to take somerisk 每 though even when I was far away there has never been a day when theShire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, Idid not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on you, not forevil, not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine

years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.'
'But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long ago?'
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even sent me a message, I wouldhave done away with it.'
'Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?'
'No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.'
'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!'
Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It nowappeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he could see. The goldlooked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was itscolour, how perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing andaltogether precious. When he took it out he had intended to fling it from himinto the very hottest part of the fire. But he found now that he could not doso, not without a great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating,
and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him; and then withan effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away 每 but he foundthat he had put it back in his pocket.
Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easilylet it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not "make" you 每 except byforce, which would break your mind. But as for breaking the Ring, force isuseless. Even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, itwould make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine.
'Your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. This Ringhas already passed through it unscathed, and even unheated. But there is nosmith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the anvilsand furnaces of the Dwarves could do that. It has been said that dragon-firecould melt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not now any dragonleft on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was there ever anydragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the One Ring, theRuling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself. There is only one way: tofind the Cracks of Doom in the depths of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and castthe Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond thegrasp of the Enemy for ever.'
'I do really wish to destroy it!' cried Frodo. 'Or, well, to have itdestroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen theRing! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?'
'Such questions cannot be answered,' said Gandalf. 'You may be sure thatit was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for power or wisdom,
at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you must therefore use suchstrength and heart and wits as you have.'
'But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise and powerful.
Will you not take the Ring?'
'No!' cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. 'With that power I shouldhave power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain a powerstill greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face was lit as by afire within. 'Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark Lordhimself. Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pity for weakness andthe desire of strength to do good. Do not tempt me! I dare not take it, noteven to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too great, for mystrength. I shall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.'
He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters.
Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along the path outsidewhistling. 'And now,' said the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the decisionlies with you. But I will always help you.' He laid his hand on Frodo'sshoulder. 'I will help you bear this burden, as long as It is yours to bear.
But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.'
There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at his pipe,
as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the lids he waswatching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the hearth,

until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down intoprofound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled Cracks of Doom and theterror of the Fiery Mountain.
'Well!' said Gandalf at last. 'What are you thinking about? Have youdecided what to do?'
'No!' answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and findingto his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the window he could seethe sunlit garden. 'Or perhaps, yes. As far as I understand what you havesaid, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the present,
whatever it may do to me.'
'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it withthat purpose,' said Gandalf.
'I hope so,' said Frodo. 'But I hope that you may find some other betterkeeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger, a danger to allthat live near me. I cannot keep the Ring and stay here. I ought to leave BagEnd, leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.' He sighed.
'I should like to save the Shire, if I could 每 though there have beentimes when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and havefelt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be good for them. ButI don't feel like that now. I feel that as long as the Shire lies behind, safeand comfortable, I shall find wandering more bearable: I shall know thatsomewhere there is a firm foothold, even if my feet cannot stand there again.
'Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined thatas a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's or better, ending inpeace. But this would mean exile, a flight from danger into danger, drawing itafter me. And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and save theShire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well 每 desperate. TheEnemy is so strong and terrible.'
He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to followBilbo flamed up in his heart 每 to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps to find himagain. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost have runout there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done on asimilar morning long ago.
'My dear Frodo!' exclaimed Gandalf. 'Hobbits really are amazingcreatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to knowabout their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can stillsurprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such an answer, not evenfrom you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he littlethought how important it would prove. I am afraid you are right. The Ring willnot be able to stay hidden in the Shire much longer; and for your own sake, aswell as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of Baggins behindyou. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or in the Wild. Iwill give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.
'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you cantrust, and who would be willing to go by your side 每 and that you would bewilling to take into unknown perils. But if you look for a companion, becareful in choosing! And be careful of what you say, even to your closestfriends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.'
Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all was veryquiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the window. Then witha dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and downwards. Therewas a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head hauled by one ear.
'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now whatmay you be doing?'
'Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I wasjust trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow me.' He pickedup his shears and exhibited them as evidence.
'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time since I last heard thesound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?'
'Eavesdropping, sir? I don't follow you, begging your pardon. There ain't

no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.'
'Don't be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?' Gandalf'seyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.
'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don'tlet him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would take on so. I meantno harm, on my honour, sir!'
'He won't hurt you,' said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as Ido, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straightaway!'
'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn'trightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir, anddragons, and a fiery mountain, and 每 and Elves, sir. I listened because Icouldn't help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I dolove tales of that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say. Elves,
sir! I would dearly love to see _them._ Couldn't you take me to see Elves,
sir, when you go?'
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come inside!' he shouted, and putting out bothhis arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all, rightthrough the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves, eh?' hesaid, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. 'So youheard that Mr. Frodo is going away?'
'I did, sir. And that's why I choked: which you heard seemingly. I triednot to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.'
'It can't be helped, Sam,' said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realizedthat flying from the Shire would mean more painful partings than merely sayingfarewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to go. But' 每 andhere he looked hard at Sam 每 'if you really care about me, you will keep that_dead_ secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of what you'veheard here, then I hope Gandalf will turn you into a spotted toad and fill thegarden full of grass-snakes.'
Sam fell on his knees, trembling. 'Get up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I havethought of something better than that. Something to shut your mouth, andpunish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!'
'Me, sir!' cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk. 'Me goand see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears.
Three is Company_Chapter 3_
'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,' said Gandalf. Two orthree weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of getting ready to go.
'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanishlike Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.'
'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all! Isaid _soon,_ not _instantly._ If you can think of any way of slipping out ofthe Shire without its being generally known, it will be worth a little delay.
But you must not delay too long.'
'What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?' asked Frodo. 'I thinkI could probably make some arrangements by then.'
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had cometo the point. Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than it had for years,
and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the Shire.
When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think morekindly of journeying, as it always did at that season. He had indeed privatelymade up his mind to leave on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo's one hundred andtwenty-eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set out and followhim. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one thing that madethe thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as possible about the

Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But he did not tell all histhoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was always difficult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that willdo 每 but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In the meanwhile,
do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going! Andsee that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him into atoad.'
'As for _where I_ am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be difficult to givethat away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.'
'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I am not warning you against leaving anaddress at the post-office! But you are leaving the Shire 每 and that shouldnot be known, until you are far away. And you must go, or at least set out,
either North, South, West or East 每 and the direction should certainly not beknown.'
'I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and ofsaying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction,' said Frodo.
'For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What is to be my quest?
Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose one, andnot return, as far as I can see.'
'But you cannot see very far,' said Gandalf. 'Neither can I. It may beyour task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I donot know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.'
'No indeed!' said Frodo. 'But in the meantime what course am I to lake?'
'Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,' answered thewizard. 'If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey should notprove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will growworse as the year fails.'
'Rivendell!' said Frodo. 'Very good: I will go east, and I will make forRivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He spokelightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to see the house ofElrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep valley where many of theFair Folk still dwelt in peace.
One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news reached the _Ivy Bush_
and _Green Dragon._ Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire wereforgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed hehad already sold it 每 to the Sackville-Bagginses!
'For a nice bit, loo,' said some. 'At a bargain price,' said others, 'andthat's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's the buyer.' (Otho had died someyears before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)
Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more debatablethan the price. A few held the theory 每 supported by the nods and hints of Mr.
Baggins himself 每 that Frodo's money was running out: he was going to leaveHobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale down in Bucklandamong his Brandybuck relations. 'As far from the Sackville-Bagginses as maybe,' some added. But so firmly fixed had the notion of the immeasurable wealthof the Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to believe,
harder than any other reason or unreason that their fancy could suggest: tomost it suggested a dark and yet unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kepthimself very quiet and did not go about by day, it was well known that he was'hiding up in the Bag End'. But however a removal might fit in with thedesigns of his wizardry, there was no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins wasgoing back to Buckland.
'Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,' he said. 'Merry Brandybuck islooking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.'
As a matter of fact with Merry's help he had already chosen and bought alittle house at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all but Samhe pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision toset out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on theeastern borders of the Shire, and as he had lived there in childhood his going

back would at least seem credible.
Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one evening, at theend of June, soon after Frodo's plan had been finally arranged, he suddenlyannounced that he was going off again next morning. 'Only for a short while, Ihope,' he said. 'But I am going down beyond the southern borders to get somenews, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.'
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried.
'Has anything happened?' he asked.
'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needslooking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get off at once, Ishall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick toyour plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the Ring. Let meimpress on you once more: _don't use it!'_
He went off at dawn. 'I may be back any day,' he said. 'At the verylatest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think after all you mayneed my company on the Road.'
At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often what Gandalfcould have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in the fine weather heforgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had seldom seen so fair a summer,
or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey was dripping inthe combs, and the corn was tall and full.
Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about Gandalfagain. September was passing and there was still no news of him. The Birthday,
and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did not come, or send word. Bag Endbegan to be busy. Some of Frodo's friends came to stay and help him with thepacking: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco Boffin, and of course his specialfriends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the wholeplace upside-down.
On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland, conveyingthe furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his new home, by way of theBrandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious, and kept aconstant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning, dawned as fairand clear as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still Gandalf did notappear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, justa dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubled and fell in nomood for it. The thought that he would so soon have to part with his youngfriends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he would break it to them.
The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the partysoon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf's absence. The dining-room wasbare except for a table and chairs, but the food was good, and there was goodwine: Frodo's wine had not been included in the sale to the Sackville-
Bagginses.
'Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get theirclaws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as hedrained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.
When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things they had donetogether, they toasted Bilbo's birthday, and they drank his health and Frodo'stogether according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff of air,
and glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo's party was over,
and Gandalf had not come.
The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the remainderof the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that isFredegar Bolger). 'Someone must get there and warm the house before youarrive,' said Merry. 'Well, see you later 每 the day after tomorrow, if youdon't go to sleep on the way!'
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo wasrestless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf. He decided towait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him urgently, he would goto Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going on foot.
His plan 每 for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any other

reason 每 was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it fairly easy.
'I shall get myself a bit into training, too,' he said, looking athimself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done anystrenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection looked rather flabby, hethought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son,
Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said Lobelia, asshe stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of BagEnd did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be forgiven:
she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years longer for Bag End thanshe once hoped, and she was now a hundred years old. Anyway, she had come tosee that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted thekeys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought a completeinventory with her and went right through it. In the end she departed withLotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key would be left atthe Gamgees' in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed plainly that she thoughtthe Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during the night. Frodo did notoffer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen. It hadbeen officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland 'to do for Mr. Frodoand look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by theGaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia as aneighbour.
'Our last meal at Bag End!' said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They leftthe washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up their three packs andpiled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last stroll in the garden. Samdisappeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. Frodowandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light of the sunset fade on thewalls, and shadows creep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark indoors. Hewent out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the path, and then on ashort way down the Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf come striding upthrough the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going to be afine night,' he said aloud. 'That's good for a beginning. I feel like walking.
I can't bear any more hanging about. I am going to start, and Gandalf mustfollow me.' He turned to go back, and then slopped, for he heard voices, justround the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was certainly the oldGaffer's; the other was strange, and somehow unpleasant. He could not make outwhat it said, but he heard the Gaffer's answers, which were rather shrill. Theold man seemed put out.
'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went withhim: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I tell'ee. Why? Why'snone of my business, or yours. Where to? That ain't no secret. He's moved toBucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is 每 a tidy way. I'venever been so far myself; they're queer folks in Buckland. No, I can't give nomessage. Good night to you!'
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why the factthat they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief. 'I am sick ofquestions and curiosity about my doings, I suppose,' he thought. 'What aninquisitive lot they all are!' He had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer whothe inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned andwalked quickly back to Bag End.
Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there. Frodostepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!'
'Coming, sir!' came the answer from far within, followed soon by Samhimself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer-barrel inthe cellar.
'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo.
'Yes, sir. I'll last for a bit now, sir.'

Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam. 'Run downwith this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cut along the Row and meet us asquick as you can at the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are not goingthrough the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes prying.' Sam ranoff at full speed.
'Well, now we're off at last!' said Frodo. They shouldered their packsand took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the west side of BagEnd. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He waved hishand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known it) hurried afterPeregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in the hedge atthe bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a rustle inthe grasses.
At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gateopening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the straps oftheir packs. Presently Sam appeared, trotting quickly and breathing hard; hisheavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head atall shapeless fell bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom he looked verymuch like a dwarf.
'I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,' said Frodo. 'I pitysnails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.'
'I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,' said Samstoutly and untruthfully.
'No, you don't, Sam!' said Pippin. 'It is good for him. He's got nothingexcept what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll feel theweight less when he's walked off some of his own.'
'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as awillow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. Isuspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it atour next packing.' He picked up his stick again. 'Well, we all like walking inthe dark,' he said, 'so let's put some miles behind us before bed.'
For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then leaving it theyturned left and took quietly to the fields again. They went in single filealong hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them.
In their dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings.
Since they were all hobbits, and were trying to be silent, they made no noisethat even hobbits would hear. Even the wild things in the fields and woodshardly noticed their passing.
After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrowplank-bridge. The stream was there no more than a winding black ribbon,
bordered with leaning alder-trees. A mile or two further south they hastilycrossed the great road from the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in theTookland and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill Country. Asthey began to climb its first slopes they looked back and saw the lamps inHobbiton far off twinkling in the gentle valley of the Water. Soon itdisappeared in the folds of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywaterbeside its grey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind, peepingamong the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell.
'I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,' he saidquietly.
When they had walked for about three hours they rested. The night wasclear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up thehill-sides from the streams and deep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in alight wind above their heads, made a black net against the pale sky. They atea very frugal supper (for hobbits), and then went on again. Soon they struck anarrow road, that went rolling up and down, fading grey into the darknessahead: the road to Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. It climbedaway from the main road in the Water-valley, and wound over the skirts of theGreen Hills towards Woody-End, a wild corner of the Eastfarthing.
After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track between tall treesthat rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first they

talked, or hummed a tune softly together, being now far away from inquisitiveears. Then they marched on in silence, and Pippin began to lag behind. Atlast, as they began to climb a steep slope, he stopped and yawned.
'I am so sleepy,' he said, 'that soon I shall fall down on the road. Areyou going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.'
'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is nogreat hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow; but thatleaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.'
'The wind's in the West,' said Sam. 'If we get to the other side of thishill, we shall find a spot that is sheltered and snug enough, sir. There is adry fir-wood just ahead, if I remember rightly.' Sam knew the land well withintwenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his geography.
Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of fir-wood. Leavingthe road they went into the deep resin-scented darkness of the trees, andgathered dead sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a merry crackleof flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it for a while,
until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the great tree's roots,
they curled up in their cloaks and blankets, and were soon fast asleep. Theyset no watch; even Frodo feared no danger yet, for they were still in theheart of the Shire. A few creatures came and looked at them when the fire had
died away. A fox passing through the wood on business of his own stoppedseveral minutes and sniffed.
'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doingsin this land, but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out of doors undera tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He wasquite right, but he never found out any more about it.
The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that atree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff.
'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't I drive?' he thought, as he usually didat the beginning of an expedition. 'And all my beautiful feather beds are soldto the Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots would do them good.' Hestretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.'
'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering over the edge of hisblanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have yougot the bath-water hot?'
Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. 'No, sir, I haven't, sir!' he said.
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and thenwalked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red outof the mists that lay thick on the world. Touched with gold and red the autumntrees seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below him tothe left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared.
When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!'
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?'
'I don't keep water in my pockets,' said Frodo. 'We thought you had goneto find some,' said Pippin, busy setting out the food, and cups. 'You hadbetter go now.'
'You can come too,' said Frodo, 'and bring all the water-bottles.' Therewas a stream at the foot of the hill. They filled their bottles and the smallcamping kettle at a little fall where the water fell a few feet over anoutcrop of grey stone. It was icy cold; and they spluttered and puffed as theybathed their faces and hands.
When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, itwas after ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. Theywent down the slope, and across the stream where it dived under the road, andup the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by thattime their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear already seemed aheavy burden.
The day's march promised to be warm and tiring work. After some miles,
however, the road ceased to roll up and down: it climbed to the top of a steepbank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to go down for the

last time. In front of them they saw the lower lands dotted with small clumpsof trees that melted away in the distance to a brown woodland haze. They werelooking across the Woody End towards the Brandywine River. The road wound awaybefore them like a piece of string.
'The road goes on for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest. Itis high time for lunch.' He sat down on the bank at the side of the road andlooked away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end of theShire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round eyeswere wide open 每 for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a newhorizon.
'Do Elves live in those woods?' he asked.
'Not that I ever heard,' said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was gazingeastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before. Suddenly he spoke,
aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with weary feet,
Until it joins some larger way,
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
'That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is itone of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.'
'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as if I was making it up;
but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very much of Bilboin the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was onlyone Road; that it was like a great river: its springs were at every doorstep,
and every path was its tributary. "It's a dangerous business, Frodo, going outof your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and if you don't keepyour feet, there is no knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realizethat this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and that if you let it,
it might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to worseplaces?" He used to say that on the path outside the front door at Bag End,
especially after he had been out for a long walk.'
'Well, the Road won't sweep me anywhere for an hour at least,' saidPippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example, putting theirpacks against the bank and their legs out into the road. After a rest they hada good lunch, and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was on theland as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road.
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was littletraffic to the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour ormore when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They were now on level ground,
and the road after much winding lay straight ahead through grass-landsprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.
'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam.
They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from seeingfar. 'I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as hesaid it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide fromthe view of the rider came over him.
'It may not matter much,' he said apologetically, 'but I would rather notbe seen on the road 每 by anyone. I am sick of my doings being noticed anddiscussed. And if it is Gandalf,' he added as an afterthought, 'we can givehim a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out ofsight!'
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow notfar from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo hesitated for a second:

curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire to hide. Thesound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch oflong grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his headand peered cautiously above one of the great roots.
Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but a full-sizedhorse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the saddle, wrappedin a great black cloak and hood, so that only his boots in the high stirrupsshowed below; his face was shadowed and invisible.
When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped. Theriding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. Frominside the hood came a noise as of someone sniffing to catch an elusive scent;
the head turned from side to side of the road.
A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and he thoughtof his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire to get it out ofhis pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand. He feltthat he had only to slip it on, and then he would be safe. The advice ofGandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in theShire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on which it hung. At thatmoment the rider sat up, and shook the reins. The horse stepped forward,
walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot.
Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until hedwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to himthat suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse turned aside and wentinto the trees on the right.
'Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said Frodo tohimself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam had remained flatin the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and hisstrange behaviour.
'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or _smelling_ for me;
and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me. I've never
seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.'
'But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?' said Pippin. 'Andwhat is he doing in this part of the world?'
'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing theyhave had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have never heard ofanything like this rider. I wonder where he comes from.'
'Begging your pardon,' put in Sam suddenly, 'I know where he comes from.
It's from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes, unless there's more thanone. And I know where he's going to.'
'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.
'Why didn't you speak up before?'
'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back toour hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: _Hello, Sam!_
he says. _I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been astrange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone.
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. He seemedmighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his old home for good.
Hissed at me, he did. It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow washe?_ says I to the Gaffer. _I don't know,_ says he; _but he wasn't a hobbit.
He was tall and black-like, and he stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of theBig Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny._
'I couldn't stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and I didn'tgive much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than a bitblind, and it must have been near dark when this fellow come up the Hill andfound him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope he hasn't done no harm,
sir, nor me.'
'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact Iheard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring for me, and Inearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me aboutit before. I might have been more careful on the road.'

'Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the Gaffer'sstranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton secretly enough, and I don't see howhe could have followed us.'
'What about the _smelling,_ sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was ablack chap.'
'I wish I had waited for Gandalf,' Frodo muttered. 'But perhaps it wouldonly have made matters worse.'
'Then you know or guess something about this rider?' said Pippin, who hadcaught the muttered words.
'I don't know, and I would rather not guess,' said Frodo. 'All right,
cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present, if you want to bemysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a bite and asup, but somehow I think we had better move on from here. Your talk ofsniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.'
'Yes, I think we will move on now,' said Frodo; 'but not on the road -incase that rider comes back, or another follows him. We ought to do a good stepmore today. Buckland is still miles away.'
The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they startedoff again. They now kept a stone's throw to the left of the road, and kept outof sight of it as much as they could. But this hindered them; for the grasswas thick and tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the trees began to drawtogether into thickets.
The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and eveningwas coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long levelover which it had run straight for some miles. At that point it bent left andwent down into the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lane branchedright, winding through a wood of ancient oak-trees on its way to Woodhall.
'That is the way for us,' said Frodo.
Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a tree: itwas still alive and had leaves on the small branches that it had put out roundthe broken stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it was hollow, and could beentered by a great crack on the side away from the road. The hobbits creptinside, and sat there upon a floor of old leaves and decayed wood. They restedand had a light meal, talking quietly and listening from time to time.
Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind wassighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the road began to fallgently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out above the trees in thedarkening East before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep up theirspirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and brighter, the feeling ofdisquiet left them, and they no longer listened for the sound of hoofs. Theybegan to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk along,
especially when they are drawing near to home at night. With most hobbits itis a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a walking-song(though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed). Bilbo Bagginshad made the words, to a tune that was as old as the hills, and taught it toFrodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water-valley and talked aboutAdventure.
Upon the hearth the fire is red,
Beneath the roof there is a bed;
But not yet weary are our feet,
Still round the corner we may meet
A sudden tree or standing stone
That none have seen but we alone.
Tree and flower and leaf and grass,
Let them pass! Let them pass!
Hill and water under sky,
Pass them by! Pass them by!
Still round the corner there may wait

A new road or a secret gate,
And though we pass them by today,
Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,
Let them go! Let them go!
Sand and stone and pool and dell,
Fare you well! Fare you well!
Home is behind, the world ahead,
And there are many paths to tread
Through shadows to the edge of night,
Until the stars are all alight.
Then world behind and home ahead,
We'll wander back to home and bed.
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,
Away shall fade! Away shall fade!
Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,
And then to bed! And then to bed!
The song ended. 'And _now_ to bed! And _now_ to bed!' sang Pippin in ahigh voice.
'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.'
They slopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening.
There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow andclear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and raninto the deeper shade under the oak-trees.
'Don't let us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but Iwant to see if it is another Black Rider.'
'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!'
The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place betterthan the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind alarge tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. Itshowed grey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Above it thestars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon.
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark passacross the lighter space between two trees, and then halt. It looked like theblack shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow. The black shadow stoodclose to the point where they had left the path, and it swayed from side toside. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. The shadow bent to theground, and then began to crawl towards him.
Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this timeit was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he realized what hewas doing, his hand was groping in his pocket. But at that moment there came asound like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in thestarlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated. It climbed on tothe shadowy horse and seemed to vanish across the lane into the darkness onthe other side. Frodo breathed again.
'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would haveburst out of the trees and dashed off towards the voices, if they had notpulled him back.
'Yes, it is Elves,' said Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes in the WoodyEnd. They don't live in the Shire, but they wander into it in Spring andAutumn, out of their own lands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am thankful thatthey do! You did not see, but that Black Rider stopped just here and wasactually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he heard thevoices he slipped away.'
'What about the Elves?' said Sam, too excited to trouble about the rider.
'Can't we go and see them?'

'Listen! They are coming this way,' said Frodo. 'We have only to wait.'
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the others. It wassinging in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and theothers knew nothing. Yet the sound blending with the melody seemed to shapeitself in their thought into words which they only partly understood. This wasthe song as Frodo heard it:
Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!
O Queen beyond the Western Seas!
O Light to us that wander here
Amid the world of woven trees!
Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!
Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee
In a far land beyond the Sea.
O stars that in the Sunless Year
With shining hand by her were sawn,
In windy fields now bright and clear
We see your silver blossom blown!
O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees,
Thy starlight on the Western Seas.
The song ended. 'These are High Elves! They spoke the name of Elbereth!'
said Frodo in amazement, 'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen in the Shire.
Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea. This is indeed astrange chance!'
The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the Elves came downthe lane towards the valley. They passed slowly, and the hobbits could see thestarlight glimmering on their hair and in their eyes. They bore no lights, yetas they walked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the rim of thehills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were now silent,
and as the last Elf passed he turned and looked towards the hobbits andlaughed.
'Hail, Frodo!' he cried. 'You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps lost?'
Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped and gatheredround.
'This is indeed wonderful!' they said. 'Three hobbits in a wood at night!
We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What is the meaning ofit?'
'The meaning of it, fair people,' said Frodo, 'is simply that we seem tobe going the same way as you are. I like walking under the stars. But I wouldwelcome your company.'
'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are so dull,' theylaughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do notknow whither we are going?'
'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return.
'We know many things,' they said. 'We have seen you often before withBilbo, though you may not have seen us.'
'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo.
'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him.
'Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of ourkindred have long ago departed and we too are now only tarrying here a while,
ere we return over the Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell still in
peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing? For we seethat there is some shadow of fear upon you.'

'O Wise People!' interrupted Pippin eagerly. 'Tell us about the BlackRiders!'
'Black Riders?' they said in low voices. 'Why do you ask about BlackRiders?'
'Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one has done sotwice,' said Pippin; 'only a little while ago he slipped away as you drewnear.'
The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly in their owntongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. 'We will not speak of thishere,' he said. 'We think you had best come now with us. It is not our custom,
but for this time we will lake you on our road, and you shall lodge with ustonight, if you will.'
'O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,' said Pippin. Sam wasspeechless. 'I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing. _'Elens赤la l~menn' omentielvo,_ a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he addedin the high-elven speech.
'Be careful, friends!' cried Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here isa scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail, Elf-friend!'
he said, bowing to Frodo. 'Come now with your friends and join our company!
You had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You may be wearybefore we halt.'
'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo.
'For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It is somemiles, but you shall have rest at the end of it, and it will shorten yourjourney tomorrow.'
They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faintlights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when they wished withoutsound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered once ortwice; but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and saved him froma fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a dream, with an expressionon his face half of fear and half of astonished joy.
The woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger andthicker; and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills,
there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. Atlast the Elves turned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseenthrough the thickets on the right; and this they followed as it wound awayback up the wooded slopes on to the top of a shoulder of the hills that stoodout into the lower land of the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of theshadow of the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass, grey under thenight. On three sides the woods pressed upon it; but eastward the ground fellsteeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope,
were below their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and flat under the stars.
Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of Woodhall.
The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; they seemedto take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his companions wrappedthemselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole over them. The nightgrew on, and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell asleep, pillowedon a green hillock.
Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars, and slowly abovethe mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some shift ofairs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned up, as heclimbed over the rim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagor withhis shining belt. The Elves all burst into song. Suddenly under the trees afire sprang up with a red light.
'Come!' the Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come! Now is the time for
speech and merriment!'
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in thehall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him.
At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. There the green

floor ran on into the wood, and formed a wide space like a hall, roofed by theboughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each side. In themiddle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars torches withlights of gold and silver were burning steadily. The Elves sat round the fireupon the grass or upon the sawn rings of old trunks. Some went to and frobearing cups and pouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates anddishes.
'This is poor fare,' they said to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in thegreenwood far from our halls. If ever you are our guests at home, we willtreat you better.'
'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo.
Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for his mindwas filled with the light upon the elf-faces, and the sound of voices sovarious and so beautiful that he felt in a waking dream. But he rememberedthat there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who isstarving; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended fruits ofgardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught, cool as aclear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon.
Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, whathe felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory as one of thechief events of his life. The nearest he ever got was to say: 'Well, sir, if Icould grow apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But it was thesinging that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.'
Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind waschiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listenedeagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them intheir own language. They smiled at him and said laughing: 'Here is a jewelamong hobbits!'
After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne awayto a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and slept therest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master. When Pippin had gone,
he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and closedhis eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor.
They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned Gildor muchabout happenings in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were mostlysad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the flight of theElves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to his heart:
'Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?'
Gildor smiled. 'Yes,' he answered. 'Twice. He said farewell to us on thisvery spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.' He would say no moreabout Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.
'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' saidGildor. 'But I already know a little, and I can read more in your face and inthe thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet youdoubt that you will find what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or thatyou will ever return. Is not that so?'
'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only toGandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring gently.
'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor.
'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?'
'I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you,' answeredGildor; 'but I perceive that he is 每 strange indeed though that seems to me.
And I warn you that peril is now both before you and behind you, and uponeither side.'
'You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the Enemy. What_are_ the Black Riders?'
'Has Gandalf told you nothing?'
'Nothing about such creatures.'
'Then I think it is not for me to say more 每 lest terror should keep youfrom your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only just in time,

if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and neither stay nor turnback; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.'
'I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying than yourhints and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew that danger lay ahead, ofcourse; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire. Can't a hobbit walkfrom the Water to the River in peace?'
'But it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here beforehobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. Thewide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot forever fence it out.'
'I know 每 and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can Ido now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, and make my way to Rivendell;
but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.'
'I think you should still follow that plan,' said Gildor. 'I do not thinkthe Road will prove too hard for your courage. But if you desire clearercounsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason for your flight, andtherefore I do not know by what means your pursuers will assail you. Thesethings Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see him before you leave theShire?'
'I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. I have beenexpecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at the latesttwo nights ago; but he has never appeared. Now I am wondering what can havehappened. Should I wait for him?'
Gildor was silent for a moment. 'I do not like this news,' he said atlast. 'That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is said: _Donot meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger._
The choice is yours: to go or wait.'
'And it is also said,' answered Frodo: 'Go _not to the Elves for counsel,
for they will say both no and yes.'_
'Is it indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves seldom give unguarded advice, foradvice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise, and all coursesmay run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning yourself;
and how then shall I choose better than you? But if you demand advice, I willfor friendship's sake give it. I think you should now go at once, withoutdelay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I also advisethis: do not go alone. Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now youshould be grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elves havetheir own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little concerned withthe ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth. Our paths crosstheirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there may be more thanchance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to say too much.'
'I am deeply grateful,' said Frodo; 'but I wish you would tell me plainlywhat the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see Gandalf for along while, and I ought to know what is the danger that pursues me.'
'Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?' answeredGildor. 'Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no more ofme! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo,
will know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May Elberethprotect you!'
'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I chieflyneed.'
'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said Gildor. 'Be of good hope!
Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will send our messagesthrough the lands. The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey, andthose that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend;
and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldom have we had suchdelight in strangers, and it is fair to hear words of the Ancient Speech fromthe lips of other wanderers in the world.'
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor finished speaking. 'Iwill sleep now,' he said; and the Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and he

threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber.
_Chapter 4_
A Short Cut to Mushrooms
In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bower made by aliving tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground; his bed was offern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The sun was shiningthrough the fluttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. He jumpedup and went out.
Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin wasstanding studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.
'They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come andhave your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. Idid not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.'
Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. 'What is the plan fortoday?' asked Pippin.
'To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,' answered Frodo, and gavehis attention to the food.
'Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?' asked Pippincheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of themdid not seem very alarming to him.
'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking the reminder. 'But I hope to getacross the river without their seeing us.'
'Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?'
'Not much 每 only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you askabout the sniffing?'
'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full.
'You should have. I am sure it is very important.'
'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain it,' saidFrodo sharply. 'And now leave me in peace for a bit! I don't want to answer astring of questions while I am eating. I want to think!'
'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards theedge of the green.
From Frodo's mind the bright morning 每 treacherously bright, he thought 每
had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor. Themerry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running on the green turf andsinging.
'No! I could not!' he said to himself. 'It is one thing to take my youngfriends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary, andfood and bed are sweet. To take them into exile, where hunger and wearinessmay have no cure, is quite another 每 even if they are willing to come. Theinheritance is mine alone. I don't think I ought even to take Sam.' He lookedat Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him.
'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon asever I can 每 in fact I have made up my mind now not even to wait a day atCrickhollow, if it can be helped.'
'Very good, sir!'
'You still mean to come with me?'
'I do.'
'It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Mostlikely neither of us will come back.'
'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam.
_'Don't you leave him!_ they said to me. _Leave him!_ I said. _I never meanto. I am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon, and if any of those BlackRulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with,_ I said. Theylaughed.'
'Who are _they,_ and what are you talking about?'
'The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemed to know you

were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying it. Wonderful folk, Elves,
sir! Wonderful!'
'They are,' said Frodo. 'Do you like them still, now you have had acloser view?'
'They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,' answered Samslowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quitedifferent from what I expected 每 so old and young, and so gay and sad, as itwere.'
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some outwardsign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him. It did not soundlike the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it lookedlike the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusuallythoughtful.
'Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now 每 now that your wish to seethem has come true already?' he asked.
'Yes, sir. I don't know how to say it, but after last night I feeldifferent. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going to takea very long road, into darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It isn't to seeElves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want 每 I don't rightly know whatI want: but I have something to do before the end, and it lies ahead, not inthe Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.'
'I don't altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a goodcompanion. I am content. We will go together.'
Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked overthe land ahead, and called to Pippin.
'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting offat once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.'
_'You_ slept late, you mean,' said Pippin. 'I was up long before; and weare only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.'
'I have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry asquickly as possible. I am not going out of the way, back to the road we leftlast night: I am going to cut straight across country from here.'
'Then you are going to fly,' said Pippin. 'You won't cut straight on footanywhere in this country.'
'We can cut straighter than the road anyway,' answered Frodo. 'The Ferryis east from Woodhall; but the hard road curves away to the left -you can seea bend of it away north over there. It goes round the north end of the Marishso as to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock. But that is milesout of the way. We could save a quarter of the distance if we made a line forthe Ferry from where we stand.'
_'Short cuts make long delays,'_ argued Pippin. 'The country is roughround here, and there are bogs and all kinds of difficulties down in theMarish -I know the land in these parts. And if you are worrying about BlackRiders, I can't see that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in a woodor a field.'
'It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields,' answered Frodo.
'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that you willbe looked for on the road and not off it.'
'All right!' said Pippin. 'I will follow you into every bog and ditch.
But it is hard! I had counted on passing the _Golden Perch_ at Stock beforesundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long timesince I tasted it.'
'That settles it!' said Frodo. 'Short cuts make delays, but inns makelonger ones. At all costs we must keep you away from the _Golden Perch_. Wewant to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?'
'I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of privatemisgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).
'Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let's go now!' saidPippin.
It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds

were beginning to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain. Thehobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and plunged into the thick treesbelow. Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their left, and tocut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side of thehills, until they reached the flats beyond. Then they could make straight forthe Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches and fences.
Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.
He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it hadappeared. There were no paths in the undergrowth, and they did not get on veryfast. When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a streamrunning down from the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with steep slipperysides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the line theyhad chosen. They could not jump over it, nor indeed get across it at allwithout getting wet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering what to do.
'First check!' said Pippin, smiling grimly.
Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he caught aglimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down.
'Look!' he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and on theedge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing. Beside itstooped a black figure.
They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way, andplunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said toPippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but wegot under cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hearanything coming?'
They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but therewas no sound of pursuit. 'I don't fancy he would try bringing his horse downthat bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he knows we came down it. We had better begoing on.'
Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry, and the bushesand brambles were reluctant to let them through. They were cut off from thewind by the ridge behind, and the air was still and stuffy. When they forcedtheir way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired and veryscratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in which theywere going. The banks of the stream sank, as it reached the levels and becamebroader and shallower, wandering off towards the Marish and the River.
'Why, this is the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try andget back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.'
They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown andtreeless, on the further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of trees:
tall oaks, for the most part, with here and there an elm tree or an ash. Theground was fairly level, and there was little undergrowth; but the trees wereloo close for them to see far ahead. The leaves blew upwards in sudden gustsof wind, and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky. Then the winddied away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged along as fast as theycould, over patches of grass, and through thick drifts of old leaves; and allabout them the rain pattered and trickled. They did not talk, but keptglancing back, and from side to side.
After half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope we have not turned too muchtowards the south, and are not walking longwise through this wood! It is not avery broad belt -I should have said no more than a mile at the widest 每 and weought to have been through it by now.'
'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won'tmend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! I am not sure that I want tocome out into the open yet.'
They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamedout of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened. It was now past mid-day, andthey felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: itsleaves though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the ground at its feelwas fairly dry and sheltered. When they came to make their meal, they found

that the Elves had filled their bottles with a clear drink, pale golden incolour: it had the scent of a honey made of many flowers, and was wonderfullyrefreshing. Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their fingers at rain,
and at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, would soon be behind them.
Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Samand Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly:
Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go
To heal my heart and drown my woe.
Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,
But under a tall tree I will lie,
And let the clouds go sailing by.
_Ho! Ho! Ho!_ they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodosprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind, like the cry of someevil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and ended on a high piercing note.
Even as they sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was answered by anothercry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to the blood. There wasthen a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in the leaves.
'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speaklightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was one that I neverheard in the Shire before.'
'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or a signal 每
there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no hobbit hassuch a voice.'
No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but noone spoke of them. They were now reluctant either to stay or go on; but sooneror later they had got to get across the open country to the Ferry, and it wasbest to go sooner and in daylight. In a few moments they had shouldered theirpacks again and were off.
Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretchedbefore them. They now saw that they had, in fact, turned too much to thesouth. Away over the flats they could glimpse the low hill of Buckleburyacross the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out fromthe edge of the trees, they set off across the open as quickly as they could.
At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood. Far backbehind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted. Frodo halfexpected to see the small distant figure of a horseman on the ridge darkagainst the sky; but there was no sign of one. The sun escaping from thebreaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shiningbrightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But theland became steadily more tame and well-ordered. Soon they came into well-
tended fields and meadows: there were hedges and gates and dikes for drainage.
Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinary corner of the Shire.
Their spirits rose with every step. The line of the River grew nearer; and theBlack Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now left far behind.
They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and came to a stoutgate. Beyond it a rutted lane ran between low well-laid hedges towards adistant clump of trees. Pippin stopped.
'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong, oldFarmer Maggot's land. That's his farm away there in the trees.'
'One trouble after another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmedas if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a dragon's den. Theothers looked at him in surprise.
'What's wrong with old Maggot?' asked Pippin. 'He's a good friend to allthe Brandy bucks. Of course he's a terror to trespassers, and keeps ferociousdogs 每 but after all, folk down here are near the border and have to be moreon their guard.'
'I know,' said Frodo. 'But all the same,' he added with a shamefaced

laugh, 'I am terrified of him and his dogs. I have avoided his farm for yearsand years. He caught me several times trespassing after mushrooms, when I wasa youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and then took meand showed me to his dogs. "See, lads," he said, "next time this young varmintsets foot on my land, you can eat him. Now see him off!" They chased me allthe way to the Ferry. I have never got over the fright 每 though I daresay thebeasts knew their business and would not really have touched me.'
Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you made it up. Especially if you arecoming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is really a stout fellow 每 if youleave his mushrooms alone. Let's get into the lane and then we shan't betrespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's,
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.'
They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs of a largehouse and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead. The Maggots, andthe Puddifoots of Stock, and most of the inhabitants of the Marish, werehouse-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wallall round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the wall into thelane.
Suddenly as they drew nearer a terrific baying and barking broke out, anda loud voice was heard shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!'
Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces. The gateopened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane, and dashed towardsthe travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but Samshrank against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at himsuspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of thethree halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling.
Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick-set hobbit with a roundred face. 'Hallo! Hallo! And who may you be, and what may you be wanting?' heasked.
'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin.
The farmer looked at him closely. 'Well, if it isn't Master Pippin 每 Mr.
Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin. 'It'sa long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know you. Iwas just going out to set my dogs on any strangers. There are some funnythings going on today. Of course, we do get queer folk wandering in theseparts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his head. 'But thisfellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes on. He won't cross my landwithout leave a second time, not if I can stop it.'
'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin.
'Then you haven't seen him?' said the farmer. 'He went up the lanetowards the causeway not a long while back. He was a funny customer and askingfunny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass the newsmore comfortable. I've a drop of good ale on tap, if you and your friends arewilling, Mr. Took.'
It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do itin his own time and fashion, so they all accepted the invitation. 'What aboutthe dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously.
The farmer laughed. 'They won't harm you 每 not unless I tell 'em to.
Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!' To the relief of Frodo andSam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.
Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' hesaid. 'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At thename Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a momentFrodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and thatthe dogs would be told to see him off. But Farmer Maggot took him by the arm.
'Well, if that isn't queerer than ever?' he exclaimed. 'Mr. Baggins isit? Come inside! We must have a talk.'
They went into the farmer's kitchen, and sat by the wide fire-place. Mrs.
Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, and filled four large mugs. It was agood brew, and Pippin found himself more than compensated for missing the

_Golden Perch._ Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural mistrust ofthe inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not disposed tobe quick friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however long ago.
After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural prospects(which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his mug and looked atthem all in turn.
'Now, Mr. Peregrin,' he said, 'where might you be coming from, and wheremight you be going to? Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you had gonepast my gate without my seeing you.'
'Well, no,' answered Pippin. 'To tell you the truth, since you haveguessed it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come over yourfields. But that was quite by accident. We lost our way in the woods, backnear Woodhall, trying to take a short cut to the Ferry.'
'If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better,' said thefarmer. 'But I wasn't worrying about that. You have leave to walk over myland, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins 每 though Idaresay you still like mushrooms.' He laughed. 'Ah yes, I recognized the name.
I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was one of the worst youngrascals of Buckland. But it wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had justheard the name Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that funnycustomer asked me?'
They waited anxiously for him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued,
approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horsein at the gate, which happened to be open, and right up to my door. All blackhe was himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want to beknown. "Now what in the Shire can he want?" I thought to myself. We don't seemany of the Big Folk over the border; and anyway I had never heard of any likethis black fellow.
' "Good-day to you!" I says, going out to him. "This lane don't leadanywhere, and wherever you may be going, your quickest way will be back to theroad." I didn't like the looks of him; and when Grip came out, he took onesniff and let out a yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail andbolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still.
' "I come from yonder," he said, slow and stiff-like, pointing back west,
over _my_ fields, if you please. "Have you seen _Baggins?"_ he asked in aqueer voice, and bent down towards me. I could not see any face, for his hoodfell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back. But I did not seewhy he should come riding over my land so bold.
' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses here. You're in the wrongpart of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton 每 but you can go byroad this time."
' "Baggins has left," he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He is notfar away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come backwith gold."
' "No you won't," I said. "You'll go back where you belong, double quick.
I give you one minute before I call all my dogs."
'He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not.
Then he spurred his great horse right at me, and I jumped out of the way onlyjust in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the gateand up the lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder. What do you thinkof that?'
Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire, but his only thought was howon earth would they reach the Ferry. 'I don't know what to think,' he said atlast.
'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never havegone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk are queer upthere.' Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer with an unfriendlyeye. 'But you were always a reckless lad. When I heard you had left theBrandybucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you were going tofind trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of those strange doings of Mr.

Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion in foreign parts, they say.
Maybe there is some that want to know what has become of the gold and jewelsthat he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?'
Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were ratherdisconcerting.
'Well, Mr. Frodo,' Maggot went on, 'I'm glad that you've had the sense tocome back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don't get mixed up withthese outlandish folk. You'll have friends in these parts. If any of theseblack fellows come after you again, I'll deal with them. I'll say you're dead,
or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be true enough;
for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.'
'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staringat the fire.
Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see you have ideas of yourown,' he said. 'It is as plain as my nose that no accident brought you andthat rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my news was no great news toyou, after all. I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mind tokeep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind of trouble. Perhaps you arethinking it won't be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught?'
'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. 'But we have got to try and get there;
and it won't be done by sitting and thinking. So I am afraid we must be going.
Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of you andyour dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh to hearit. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to leave sosoon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day 每 if I get a chance.'
'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion.
It's near sundown already, and we are going to have our supper; for we mostlygo to bed soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and all could stay andhave a bite with us, we would be pleased!'
'And so should we!' said Frodo. 'But we must be going at once, I'mafraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.'
'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'llgel out a small waggon, and I'll drive you all to the Ferry. That will saveyou a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.'
Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin andSam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light was failing.
Two of Maggot's sons and his three daughters came in, and a generous supperwas laid on the large table. The kitchen was lit with candles and the fire wasmended. Mrs. Maggot hustled in and out. One or two other hobbits belonging tothe farm-household came in. In a short while fourteen sat down to eat. There
was beer in plenty, and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon, besides muchother solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay by the fire and gnawed rinds andcracked bones.
When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lanternand got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out.
They threw their packs on board and climbed in. The farmer sat in the driving-
seat, and whipped up his two stout ponies. His wife stood in the light of theopen door.
'You be careful of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't go arguing withany foreigners, and come straight back!'
'I will!' said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now no breath ofwind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air. Theywent without lights and took it slowly. After a mile or two the lane came toan end, crossing a deep dike, and climbing a short slope up on to the high-
banked causeway.
Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and south, butnothing could be seen in the darkness, and there was not a sound in the stillair. Thin strands of river-mist were hanging above the dikes, and crawlingover the fields.
'It's going to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but I'll not light my lantern

till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet ittonight.'
It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The hobbitswrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any sound above thecreak of the wheels and the slow _clop_ of the ponies' hoofs. The waggonseemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was nodding towardssleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog.
They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked by twotall white posts that suddenly loomed up on their right. Farmer Maggot drew inhis ponies and the waggon creaked to a halt. They were just beginning loscramble out, when suddenly they heard what they had all been dreading: hoofson the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them.
Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies' heads, and peeringforward into the gloom. _Clip-clop, clip-clop_ came the approaching rider. Thefall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air.
'You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam anxiously. 'You get down inthe waggon and cover up with blankets, and we'll send this rider to therightabouts!' He climbed out and went to the farmer's side. Black Riders wouldhave to ride over him to get near the waggon.
_Clop-clop, clop-clop._ The rider was nearly on them.
'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.
They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yardor two ahead. 'Now then!' said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam andstriding forward. 'Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and whereare you going?'
'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' said a muffled voice 每 but thevoice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A dark lantern was uncovered, and itslight fell on the astonished face of the farmer.
'Mr. Merry!' he cried.
'Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward. Ashe came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly todiminish to ordinary hobbit-size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf wasswathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog.
Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. 'So there you are at last!'
said Merry. 'I was beginning to wonder if you would turn up at all today, andI was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across and rode uptowards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches. But I'm blest if I knowwhich way you have come. Where did you find them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck-
pond?'
'No, I caught 'em trespassing,' said the farmer, 'and nearly set my dogson 'em; but they'll tell you all the story, I've no doubt. Now, if you'llexcuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all, I'd best be turning for home. Mrs.
Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.'
He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good night toyou all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well asends well; though perhaps we should not say that until we reach our own doors.
I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I do.' He lit his lanterns, and gotup. Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. 'I was nearlyforgetting,' he said. 'Mrs. Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins, with hercompliments.' He handed it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of thanksand good-nights.
They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as they dwindledinto the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: from the covered basket he held,
the scent of mushrooms was rising.
_Chapter 5_
A Conspiracy Unmasked
'Now we had better get home ourselves,' said Merry. There's something

funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.'
They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept andedged with large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards or so it brought themto the river-bank, where there was a broad wooden landing-stage. A large flatferry-boat was moored beside it. The white bollards near the water's edgeglimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind them the mists inthe flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before them was dark,
with only a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank. Thereseemed to be less fog on the further side.
Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and the othersfollowed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long pole. The Brandywine flowedslow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and up it awinding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling there.
Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds of mist,
shone many round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows of BrandyHall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.
Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one of the oldestin the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed the river, which was theoriginal boundary of the land eastwards. He built (and excavated) Brandy Hall,
changed his name to Brandybuck, and settled down to become master of what wasvirtually a small independent country. His family grew and grew, and after hisdays continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the low hill,
and had three large front-doors, many side-doors, and about a hundred windows.
The Brandybucks and their numerous dependants then began to burrow, and laterto build, all round about. That was the origin of Buckland, a thicklyinhabited strip between the river and the Old Forest, a sort of colony fromthe Shire. Its chief village was Bucklebury, clustering in the banks andslopes behind Brandy Hall.
The people in the Marish were friendly with the Bucklanders, and theauthority of the Master of the Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck family wascalled) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey. Butmost of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, halfforeigners as it were. Though, as a matter of fact, they were not verydifferent from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point:
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim.
Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but on that sidethey had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been planted many generationsago, and was now thick and tail, for it was constantly tended. It ran all theway from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from the river, toHaysend (where the Withywindle flowed out of the Forest into the Brandywine):
well over twenty miles from end to end. But, of course, it was not a completeprotection. The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. The Bucklanderskept their doors locked after dark, and that also was not usual in the Shire.
The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore drewnearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the riverbefore. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: hisold life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratchedhis head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have goneon living quietly at Bag End.
The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it up, and Pippinwas already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (who had been looking back,
as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper:
'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?'
On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just make out afigure: it looked like a dark black bundle left behind. But as they looked itseemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It thencrawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.
'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry.
'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask any morenow! Let's get away at once!' They hurried up the path to the top of the bank,

but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded in mist, and nothingcould be seen.
'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west-bank!' said Frodo.
'Can horses cross the river?'
'They can go twenty miles north to Brandywine Bridge 每 or they mightswim,' answered Merry. 'Though I never heard of any horse swimming theBrandywine. But what have horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let'sget indoors and then we can talk.'
'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tellFatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.'
'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo; 'but we coulddo with another.'
'You shall have it! Give me that basket!' said Merry, and rode ahead intothe darkness.
It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo's new house atCrickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on theoutskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south fromthe Bridge. Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane opening ontheir right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it climbed up anddown into the country.
At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could beseen of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of a
wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge.
Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of thecountry, and there were no other dwellings close by. You could get in and outwithout being noticed. It had been built a long while before by theBrandybucks, for the use of guests, or members of the family that wished toescape from the crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old-
fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it waslong and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round windows,
and a large round door.
As they walked lip the green path from the gate no light was visible; thewindows were dark and shuttered. Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty Bolgeropened it. A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and shutthemselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on eitherside; in front of them a passage ran back down the middle of the house.
'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'Wehave done our best in a short time to make it look like home. After all Fattyand I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.'
Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own favouritethings 每 or Bilbo's things (they reminded him sharply of him in their newselling) 每 were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been at Bag End. Itwas a pleasant, comfortable, welcoming place; and he found himself wishingthat he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retirement. It seemedunfair to have put his friends to all this trouble; and he wondered again howhe was going to break the news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeedat once. Yet that would have to be done that very night, before they all wentto bed.
'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I hardly feel that I havemoved at all.'
The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on the floor.
Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end.
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.
'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!'
'Which order shall we go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest first, or quickestfirst? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.'
'Trust me to arrange things better than that!' said Merry. 'We can'tbegin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are_three_ tubs, and a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, matsand soap. Get inside, and be quick!'

Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage,
and busied themselves with the final preparations for a late supper. Snatchesof competing songs came from the bathroom mixed with the sound of splashingand wallowing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above the others inone of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs.
Sing hey! for the bath at close of day
that washes the weary mud away!
A loon is he that will not sing:
O! Water Hot is a noble thing!
O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.
O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;
but better is Beer, if drink we lack,
and Water Hot poured down the back.
O! Water is fair that leaps on high
in a fountain white beneath the sky;
but never did fountain sound so sweet
as splashing Hot Water with my feet!
There was a terrific splash, and a shout of _Whoa!_ from Frodo. Itappeared that a lot of Pippin's bath had imitated a fountain and leaped onhigh.
Merry went to the door: 'What about supper and beer in the throat?' hecalled. Frodo came out drying his hair.
'There's so much water in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen tofinish,' he said.
'Lawks!' said Merry, looking in. The stone floor was swimming. 'You oughtto mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said. 'Hurryup, or we shan't wait for you.'
They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose youthree won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope.
'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin.
'They're mine!' said Frodo. 'Given to _me_ by Mrs. Maggot, a queen amongfarmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.'
Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the greediestlikings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young Frodo's longexpeditions to the renowned fields of the Marish, and the wrath of the injuredMaggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to hobbitstandards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they hadfinished even Fatty Bolger heaved a sigh of content. They pushed back thetable, and drew chairs round the fire.
'We'll clear up later,' said Merry. 'Now tell me all about it! I guessthat you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. Iwant a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter withold Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was_scared,_ if that is possible.'
'We have all been scared,' said Pippin after a pause, in which Frodostared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been, too, if you hadbeen chased for two days by Black Riders.'
'And what are they?'
'Black figures riding on black horses,' answered Pippin. 'If Frodo won'ttalk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave a full

account of their journey from the time when they left Hobbiton. Sam gavevarious supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent.
'I should think you were making it all up,' said Merry, 'if I had notseen that black shape on the landing-stage 每 and heard the queer sound inMaggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?'
'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has comefor him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more to go on thanFarmer Maggot's guess that it has something to do with old Bilbo's treasure.'
'That was only a guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does not_know_anything.'
'Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind hisround face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to gointo the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a goodmany strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you thinkhis guess good or bad.'
'I _think,'_ answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as far asit goes. There _is a_ connexion with Bilbo's old adventures, and the Ridersare looking, or perhaps one ought to say _searching,_ for him or for me. Ialso fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am notsafe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as ifhe was afraid they would suddenly give way. The others looked at him insilence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves.
'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded.
'Well!' said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as ifhe had made a decision. 'I can't keep it dark any longer. I have got somethingto tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.'
'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some ofit myself.'
'What do you mean?' said Frodo, looking at him anxiously. 'Just this, mydear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don't know how to say good-bye.
You meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come on you soonerthan you expected, and now you are making up your mind to go at once. And youdon't want to. We are very sorry for you.'
Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise was socomical that they laughed. 'Dear old Frodo!' said Pippin. 'Did you reallythink you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful orclever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and sayingfarewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have constantlyheard you muttering: "Shall I ever look down into that valley again, Iwonder", and things like that. And pretending that you had come to the end ofyour money, and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville-
Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.'
'Good heavens!' said Frodo. 'I thought I had been both careful andclever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire discussing mydeparture then?'
'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep forlong, of course; but at present it is, I think, only known to us conspirators.
After all, you must remember that we know you well, and are often with you. Wecan usually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo, too. To tell you thetruth, I had been watching you rather closely ever since he left. I thoughtyou would go after him sooner or later; indeed I expected you to go sooner,
and lately we have been very anxious. We have been terrified that you mightgive us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your own like he did. Ever sincethis spring we have kept our eyes open, and done a good deal of planning onour own account. You are not going to escape so easily!'
'But I must go,' said Frodo. 'It cannot be helped, dear friends. It iswretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you haveguessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!'
'You do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You must go 每 and therefore wemust, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow, and

would jump down a dragon's throat to save you, if he did not trip over his ownfeet; but you will need more than one companion in your dangerous adventure.'
'My dear and most beloved hobbits!' said Frodo deeply moved. 'But I couldnot allow it. I decided that long ago, too. You speak of danger, but you donot understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-and-back journey. I amflying from deadly peril into deadly peril.'
'Of course we understand,' said Merry firmly. 'That is why we havedecided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going todo our best to help you against the Enemy.'
'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed.
'Yes, the Ring,' said Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't allow for theinquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring foryears 每 before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded it assecret, I kept the knowledge in my head, until we formed our conspiracy. I didnot know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was too young, and he wasalso more careful 每 but he was not careful enough. If you want to know how Ifirst found out, I will tell you.'
'Go on!' said Frodo faintly.
'It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you mightexpect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along theroad, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared,
coming towards us. Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he vanished. I wasso startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinaryfashion; but I got through the hedge and walked along the field inside. I waspeeping through into the road, after the S.-B.s had passed, and was lookingstraight at Bilbo when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of gold as heput something back in his trouser-pocket.
'After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But youmust admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my teens. I must bethe only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the oldfellow's secret book.'
'You have read his book!' cried Frodo. 'Good heavens above! Is nothingsafe?'
'Not too safe, I should say,' said Merry. 'But I have only had one rapidglance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I wonderwhat became of it. I should like another look. Have you got it, Frodo?'
'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.'
'Well, as I was saying,' Merry proceeded, 'I kept my knowledge to myself,
till this Spring when things got serious. Then we formed our conspiracy; andas we were serious, too, and meant business, we have not been too scrupulous.
You are not a very easy nut to crack, and Gandalf is worse. But if you want tobe introduced to our chief investigator, I can produce him.'
'Where is he?' said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a masked andsinister figure to come out of a cupboard.
'Step forward, Sam!' said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face scarlet upto the ears. 'Here's our collector of information! And he collected a lot, Ican tell you, before he was finally caught. After which, I may say, he seemedto regard himself as on parole, and dried up.'
'Sam!' cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further, and quiteunable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved, or merely foolish.
'Yes, sir!' said Sam. 'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no wrong toyou, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. _He_ has some sense, mindyou; and when you said _go alone,_ he said _no! lake someone as you cantrust.'_
'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo. Sam looked athim unhappily. 'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can trustus to stick to you through thick and thin 每 to the bitter end. And you cantrust us to keep any secret of yours 每 closer than you keep it yourself. Butyou cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off without a word.
We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what Gandalf

has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly afraid 每 butwe are coming with you; or following you like hounds.'
'And after all, sir,' added Sam, 'you did ought to take the Elves'advice. Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't denyit.'
'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'Idon't deny it, but I'll never believe you are sleeping again, whether yousnore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.
'You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!' he said, turning to the others.
'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give in. Iwill take Gildor's advice. If the danger were not so dark, I should dance forjoy. Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier than I have felt for a longtime. I had dreaded this evening.'
'Good! That's settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company!' theyshouted; and they danced round him. Merry and Pippin began a song, which theyhad apparently got ready for the occasion.
It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on hisadventure long ago, and went to the same tune:
Farewell we call to hearth and hall!
Though wind may blow and rain may fall,
We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,
Through moor and waste we ride in haste,
And whither then we cannot tell.
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,
Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things todo before we go to bed 每 under a roof, for tonight at any rate.'
'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start beforethe break of day?'
'I don't know,' answered Frodo. 'I fear those Black Riders, and I am sureit is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place to which it isknown I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to wait. But I should very muchlike to see Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed when he heard
that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on two things. How sooncould the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how soon could we get off? It willtake a good deal of preparation.'
'The answer to the second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could getoff in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six poniesin a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except for afew extra clothes, and the perishable food.'
'It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'Butwhat about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?'
'That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they foundyou here,' answered Merry. 'They _could_ have reached here by now, of course,
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to theriver-bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let themthrough by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they

would try to keep them out, I think, at any rate until they got a messagethrough to the Master of the Hall 每 for they would not like the look of theRiders, and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Bucklandcannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in themorning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr. Baggins would be letthrough. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back to live atCrickhollow.'
Frodo sat for a while in thought. 'I have made up my mind,' he saidfinally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not goingby road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go through the North-
gate my departure from Buckland will be known at once, instead of being secretfor several days at least, as it might be. And what is more, the Bridge andthe East Road near the borders will certainly be watched, whether any Ridergets into Buckland or not. We don't know how many there are; but there are atleast two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is to go off in a quiteunexpected direction.'
'But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!' said Fredegarhorrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous asBlack Riders.'
'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very desperate, but I believe Frodo isright. It is the only way of getting off without being followed at once. Withluck we might gel a considerable start.'
'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'Noone ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.'
'Oh yes they do!' said Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in 每 occasionally whenthe fit takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went in once, long ago.
I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when the treesare sleepy and fairly quiet.'
'Well, do as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of the OldForest than of anything I know about: the stories about it are a nightmare;
but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on the journey. Still, I am veryglad someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what you have done, whenhe turns up, as I am sure he will before long.'
Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire,
nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, fromBudgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the BrandywineBridge. His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, was tostay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keep up as long as possiblethe pretence that Mr. Baggins was still living at Crickhollow. He had evenbrought along some old clothes of Frodo's to help him in playing the part.
They little thought how dangerous that part might prove.
'Excellent!' said Frodo, when he understood the plan. 'We could not haveleft any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don't know whether theseRiders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk awritten message, in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty iswilling to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we havegone, that decides me. I am going into the Old Forest first thing tomorrow.'
'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have ourjob than Fatty's 每 waiting here till Black Riders come.'
'You wait till you are well inside the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'llwish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.'
'It's no good arguing about it any more,' said Merry. 'We have still gotto tidy up and put the finishing touches to the packing, before we get to bed.
I shall call you all before the break of day.'
When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some time. Hislegs ached. He. was glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually he fellinto a vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking out of a high window overa dark sea of tangled trees. Down below among the roots there was the sound ofcreatures crawling and snuffling. He felt sure they would smell him out sooneror later.

Then he heard a noise in the distance. At first he thought it was a greatwind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that it was notleaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in wakinglife, though it had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he was out inthe open. There were no trees after all. He was on a dark heath, and there wasa strange salt smell in the air. Looking up he saw before him a tall whitetower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over him to climbthe tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge towards thetower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a noise of thunder.
The Old Forest
_Chapter 6_
Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standingthere with a candle in one hand, and banging on the door with the other. 'Allright! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.
'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is time to get up. It is half past fourand very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippinis up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to bethe baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and seeus off.'
Soon after six o'clock the five hobbits were ready to start. Fatty Bolgerwas still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in frontleading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that went through aspinney behind the house, and then cut across several fields. The leaves oftrees were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass was grey withcold dew. Everything was still, and far-away noises seemed near and clear:
fowls chattering in a yard, someone closing a door of a distant house.
In their shed they found the ponies; sturdy little beasts of the kindloved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day's work. They mounted,
and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed to open reluctantlybefore them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for about anhour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Hedge looming suddenly ahead.
It was tall and netted over with silver cobwebs. 'How are you going to getthrough this?' asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry, 'and you will see.' Heturned to the left along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point where itbent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting had been made, atsome distance from the Hedge, and went sloping gently down into the ground. Ithad walls of brick at the sides, which rose steadily, until suddenly theyarched over and formed a tunnel that dived deep under the Hedge and came outin the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he said. 'I wish you werenot going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before theday is out. But good luck to you 每 today and every day!'
'If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall belucky,' said Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we shall soonbe back on it and going as fast as we can.' 'Good-bye!' they cried, and rodedown the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel.
It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a gate of thick-setiron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had all passedthrough he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock clicked. Thesound was ominous.
'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, andon the edge of the Old Forest.'
'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin.
'I don't know what stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean theold bogey-stories Fatty's nurses used to tell him, about goblins and wolvesand things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I don't believe them.
But the Forest _is_ queer. Everything in it is very much more alive, more

aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are in the Shire. And thetrees do not like strangers. They watch you. They are usually content merelyto watch you, as long as daylight lasts, and don't do much. Occasionally themost unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, or grasp at youwith a long trailer. But at night things can be most alarming, or so I amtold. I have only once or twice been in here after dark, and then only nearthe hedge. I thought all the trees were whispering to each other, passing newsand plots along in an unintelligible language; and the branches swayed andgroped without any wind. They do say the trees do actually move, and cansurround strangers and hem them in. In fact long ago they attacked the Hedge:
they came and planted themselves right by it, and leaned over it. But thehobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and made a great bonfire in theForest, and burned all the ground in a long strip east of the Hedge. Afterthat the trees gave up the attack, but they became very unfriendly. There isstill a wide bare space not far inside where the bonfire was made.'
'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin.
'There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, and on the farside,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never seen any ofthem. But something makes paths. Whenever one comes inside one finds opentracks; but they seem to shift and change from time to time in a queerfashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or was for a long time, thebeginning of quite a broad path leading to the Bonfire Glade, and then on moreor less in our direction, east and a little north. That is the path I am goingto try and find.'
The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide hollow. Onthe far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, ahundred yards and more beyond the Hedge; but it vanished as soon as it broughtthem under the trees. Looking back they could see the dark line of the Hedgethrough the stems of trees that were already thick about them. Looking aheadthey could see only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes and shapes: straight orbent, twisted, leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched; andall the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, shaggy growths.
Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. 'You had better lead on and find thatpath,' Frodo said to him. 'Don't let us lose one another, or forget which waythe Hedge lies!'
They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies plodded along,
carefully avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots. There was noundergrowth. The ground was rising steadily, and as they went forward itseemed that the trees became taller, darker, and thicker. There was no sound,
except an occasional drip of moisture falling through the still leaves. Forthe moment there was no whispering or movement among the branches; but theyall got an uncomfortable feeling that they were being watched withdisapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. The feeling steadily grew,
until they found themselves looking up quickly, or glancing back over theirshoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.
There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees seemed constantlyto bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt that he could not bear it any longer,
and without warning let out a shout. 'Oi! Oi!' he cried. 'I am not going to doanything. Just let me pass through, will you!'
The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if muffled by a heavycurtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood seemed to become morecrowded and more watchful than before.
good.'
'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than
Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, and ifhe had been right to make the others come into this abominable wood. Merry waslooking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go.
Pippin noticed it. 'It has not taken you long to lose us,' he said. But atthat moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead.
'Well, well!' he said. 'These trees _do_ shift. There is the Bonfire

Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have movedaway!'
The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they came out ofthe trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky abovethem, blue and clear to their surprise, for down under the Forest-roof theyhad not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. Thesun was not, however, high enough yet to shine down into the clearing, thoughits light was on the tree-tops. The leaves were all thicker and greener aboutthe edges of the glade, enclosing it with an almost solid wall. No tree grewthere, only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky and faded hemlocks andwood-parsley, fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes, and rampant nettles andthistles. A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and cheerful garden afterthe close Forest.
The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadeningdaylight in the sky. At the far side of the glade there was a break in thewall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on intothe wood, wide in places and open above, though every now and again the treesdrew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path they rode.
They were still climbing gently, but they now went much quicker, and withbetter heart; for it seemed to them that the Forest had relented, and wasgoing to let them pass unhindered after all.
But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The trees drewclose again on either side, and they could no longer see far ahead. Nowstronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood pressing on them.
So silent was it that the fall of their ponies' hoofs, rustling on dead leavesand occasionally stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud in their ears.
Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank to a murmur.
O! Wanderers in the shadowed land
despair not! For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day's end, or the day begun.
For east or west all woods must fail ...
_Fail -_ even as he said the word his voice faded into silence. The air
seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome. Just behind them a largebranch fell from an old overhanging tree with a crash into the path. The treesseemed to close in before them.
'They do not like all that about ending and failing,' said Merry. 'Ishould not sing any more at present. Wait till we do get to the edge, and thenwe'll turn and give them a rousing chorus!'
He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did not showit. The others did not answer. They were depressed. A heavy weight wassettling steadily on Frodo's heart, and he regretted now with every stepforward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace of the trees. Hewas, indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (if that was stillpossible), when things took a new turn. The path stopped climbing, and becamefor a while nearly level. The dark trees drew aside, and ahead they could seethe path going almost straight forward. Before them, but some distance off,
there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald head out of theencircling wood. The path seemed to be making directly for it.
They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of climbingout for a while above the roof of the Forest. The path dipped, and then againbegan to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steephillside. There it left the trees and faded into the turf. The wood stood all
round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle round a shavencrown.

The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round until theyreached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleamingand sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near athand the mist was now almost gone; though here and there it lay in hollows ofthe wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold cutting right acrossthe Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.
'That,' said Merry, pointing with his hand, 'that is the line of theWithywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through themidst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to go_that_ way! The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest part of thewhole wood 每 the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.'
The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, but they couldsee little but mists over the damp and deep-cut valley; and beyond it thesouthern half of the Forest faded from view.
The sun on the hill-lop was now getting hot. It must have been abouteleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much inother directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of theHedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond it. Northward, where they lookedmost hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of the greatEast Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea oftrees, and the horizon was veiled.
On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the slopesof the hill were continued far down under the trees, like island-shores thatreally are the sides of a mountain rising out of deep waters. They sat on thegreen edge and looked out over the woods below them, while they ate their midday
meal. As the sun rose and passed noon they glimpsed far off in the eastthe grey-green lines of the Downs that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side.
That cheered them greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyondthe wood's borders, though they did not mean to go that way, if they couldhelp it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a reputation in hobbit-legend as theForest itself.
At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path that hadbrought them to the hill reappeared on the northward side; but they had notfollowed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to theright. Soon it began to descend rapidly and they guessed that it must actuallybe heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the direction theywished lo take. After some discussion they decided to leave this misleadingpath and strike northward; for although they had not been able to see it fromthe hill-top, the Road must lie that way, and it could not be many miles off.
Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed lo be drier andmore open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were thinner, and pines andfirs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange and nameless trees of thedenser wood.
At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair speed,
though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun in an open glade they seemedunaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after a time the trees began toclose in again, just where they had appeared from a distance to be thinner andless tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were discovered unexpectedly, likethe ruts of great giant-wheels or wide moats and sunken roads long disused andchoked with brambles. These lay usually right across their line of march, andcould only be crossed by scrambling down and out again, which was troublesomeand difficult with their ponies. Each time they climbed down they found thehollow filled with thick bushes and matted undergrowth, which somehow wouldnot yield to the left, but only gave way when they turned to the right; andthey had to go some distance along the bottom before they could find a way upthe further bank. Each time they clambered out, the trees seemed deeper anddarker; and always to the left and upwards it was most difficult to find away, and they were forced to the right and downwards.
After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, thoughthey knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They

were being headed off, and were simply following a course chosen for them 每
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it.
The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled into afold that was wider and deeper than any they had yet met. It was so sleep andoverhung that it proved impossible to climb out of it again, either forwardsor backwards, without leaving their ponies and their baggage behind. All theycould do was to follow the fold 每 downwards. The ground grew soft, and inplaces boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they found themselvesfollowing a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy bed. Then theground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and noisy, flowedand leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully over-arched bytrees high above them.
After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they came quitesuddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight beforethem. Coming to the opening they found that they had made their way downthrough a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a widespace of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bankalmost as steep. A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy uponthe hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river ofbrown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with willows, blockedwith fallen willows, and flecked with thousands of faded willow-leaves. Theair was thick with them, fluttering yellow from the branches; for there was awarm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley, and the reeds wererustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.
'Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!' said Merry. 'Wehave come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is theRiver Withywindle! I will go on and explore.'
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long grasses.
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid groundbetween the cliff-foot and the river; in some places firm turf went down tothe water's edge. 'What's more,' he said, 'there seems to be something like afootpath winding along on this side of the river. If we turn left and followit, we shall be bound to come out on the east side of the Forest eventually.'
'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That is, if the track goes on so far, anddoes not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. Who made the track, doyou suppose, and why? I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting verysuspicious of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe all thestories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we should have to
go?'
'No,' said Merry, 'I haven't. I don't know in the least how far down theWithywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to make apath along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.'
There being nothing else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them tothe path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and grasses were lushand tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easyto follow, as it turned and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among thebogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills, running downgullies into the Withywindle out of the higher forest-lands, and at thesepoints there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.
The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies of allkinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning on theirbacks. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great grey branchesreached across the path. Each step forward became more reluctant than thelast. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their legs,
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes.
Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him Pippinfell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard Merrysaying. 'Can't go another step without rest. Must have nap. It's cool underthe willows. Less flies!'
Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come on!' he cried. 'We can't have

a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were too fargone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.
Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head swam. Therenow seemed hardly a sound in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing. Only agentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song halfwhispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes andsaw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it looked,
its sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many long-fingeredhands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures that creakedfaintly as the boughs moved. The leaves fluttering against the bright skydazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the grass.
Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay down with their backsto the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped wide to receive themas the tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and yellow leaves,
moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their eyes, and thenit seemed that they could almost hear words, cool words, saying somethingabout water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell and fell fastasleep at the foot of the great grey willow.
Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was overpowering him;
then with an effort he struggled to his feel again. He felt a compellingdesire for cool water. 'Wait for me, Sam,' he stammered. 'Must bathe feet aminute.'
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the tree,
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled dragonetsstraining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feelin the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his backagainst the tree.
Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern. He wasworried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this sudden sleepinessuncanny. 'There's more behind this than sun and warm air,' he muttered tohimself. 'I don't like this great big tree. I don't trust it. Hark at itsinging about sleep now! This won't do at all!'
He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had becomeof the ponies. He found that two had wandered on a good way along the path;
and he had just caught them and brought them back towards the others, when heheard two noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. One was thesplash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise likethe snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast.
He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the edge, anda great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was notstruggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and dragged him from under theroot; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once hewoke, and coughed and spluttered.
'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree _threw_ me in! Ifelt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!'
'You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit insuch a place, if you feel sleepy.'
'What about the others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder what sort of dreams theyare having.'
They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam understoodthe click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The crack by which he hadlaid himself had closed together, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry wastrapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, butthe rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of which gripped like apair of pincers.
Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had lain. Theythen struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held poorMerry. It was quite useless.
'What a foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo wildly. 'Why did we ever comeinto this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow!' He kicked

the tree with all his strength, heedless of his own feet. A hardly perceptibleshiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves rustled andwhispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter.
Sam.
'I suppose we haven't got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked
'I brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'Thatwouldn't be much use.'
'Wait a minute!' cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by firewood. 'Wemight do something with fire!'
'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippinalive inside.'
'We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,' said Samfiercely. 'If it don't let them go, I'll have it down, if I have to gnaw it.'
He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinder-boxes and ahatchet.
Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and made apile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped against the trunkon the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had struck aspark into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of flame andsmoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little fingers of fire licked against thedry scored rind of the ancient tree and scorched it. A tremor ran through thewhole willow. The leaves seemed to hiss above their heads with a sound of painand anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far inside the tree theyheard Pippin give a muffled yell.
'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if youdon't. He says so!'
'Who? What?' shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of the tree.
'Put it out! Put it out!' begged Merry. The branches of the willow beganto sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreadingoutwards to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though theyhad dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the river-valley and set upripples of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at the littlefire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of why hedid so, or what he hoped for, ran along the path crying _help! help! help!_Itseemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill voice: itwas blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a clamour of leaves,
as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate: lost and witless.
Suddenly he slopped. There was an answer, or so he thought; but it seemedto come from behind him, away down the path further back in the Forest. Heturned round and listened, and soon there could be no doubt: someone wassinging a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and happily, but itwas singing nonsense:
Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo!
Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow!
Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!
Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now bothstood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words (or so theyseemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song:
Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling!
Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.
Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,
There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter,
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.
Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringingComes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?
Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o,

Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!
Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!
Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.
Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing.
Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The leaves hungsilently again on stiff branches. There was another burst of song, and thensuddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there appeared above the reedsan old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in theband. With another hop and a bound there came into view a man, or so itseemed. At any rate he was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tallenough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one,
slumping along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging throughgrass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat and a longbrown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face was red as a ripeapple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his hands hecarried on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white water-lilies.
'Help!' cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their handsstretched out.
'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, andthey stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff. 'Now, my little fellows,
where be you a-going to, puffing like a bellows? What's the matter here then?
Do you know who I am? I'm Tom Bombadil. Tell me what's your trouble! Tom's ina hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!'
'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly.
'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam.
'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. 'Old Man Willow?
Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be mended. I know the tune for him.
Old grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his marrow cold, if he don't behave himself.
I'll sing his roots off. I'll sing a wind up and blow leaf and branch away.
Old Man Willow!' Setting down his lilies carefully on the grass, he ran to thetree. There he saw Merry's feet still sticking out 每 the rest had already beendrawn further inside. Tom put his mouth to the crack and began singing into itin a low voice. They could not catch the words, but evidently Merry wasaroused. His legs began to kick. Tom sprang away, and breaking off a hangingbranch smote the side of the willow with it. 'You let them out again, Old ManWillow!' he said. 'What be you a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eatearth! Dig deep! Drink water! Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He thenseized Merry's feet and drew him out of the suddenly widening crack.
There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of itPippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then with a loud snap both cracksclosed fast again. A shudder ran through the tree from root to tip, andcomplete silence fell.
'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other.
Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. 'Well, my little fellows!' said he,
stooping so that he peered into their faces. 'You shall come home with me! Thetable is all laden with yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread and butter.
Goldberry is waiting. Time enough for questions around the supper table. Youfollow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up his lilies,
and then with a beckoning wave of his hand went hopping and dancing along thepath eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically.
Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed after him asfast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared infront of them, and the noise of his singing got fainter and further away.
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!
Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!
Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle.

Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping.
When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,
Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.
Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!
Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.
Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you!
After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to
sink into the trees behind them. They thought of the slanting light of eveningglittering on the Brandywine River, and the windows of Bucklebury beginning togleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them; trunks andbranches of trees hung dark and threatening over the path. White mists beganto rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the roots of thetrees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a shadowy steamarose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.
It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Theirlegs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds oneither side of them; and if they looked up to the pale sky, they caught sightof queer gnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against the twilight, andleered down at them from the high bank and the edges of the wood. They beganto feel that all this country was unreal, and that they were stumbling throughan ominous dream that led to no awakening.
Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticedthat the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In the darknessthey caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river flowed over a shortfall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left behind.
They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweep of grass welling upbefore them. The river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily down to meetthem, glinting here and there in the light of the stars, which were alreadyshining in the sky.
The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mownor shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge.
The path was now plain before them, well-tended and bordered with stone. Itwound up on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the pale starrynight; and there, still high above them on a further slope, they saw thetwinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up again, up along smooth hillside of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow beamflowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom Bombadil'shouse before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep shoulder of theland lay grey and bare, and beyond that the dark shapes of the Barrow-downsstalked away into the eastern night.
They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half theirweariness and all their fears had fallen from them. _Hey! Come merry dol!_
rolled out the song to greet them.
Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties!
Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties.
Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together!
Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like thesong of a glad water flowing down into the night from a bright morning in thehills, came falling like silver to meet them:
Now let the song begin! Let us sing together
Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,
Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,
Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,
Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:
Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!

And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a goldenlight was all about them.
_Chapter 7_
In the House of Tom Bombadil
The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and stood still,
blinking. They were in a long low room, filled with the light of lampsswinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished woodstood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly.
In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer door, sat awoman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown was green,
green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads of dew; and her belt was ofgold, shaped like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes offorget-me-nots. About her feel in wide vessels of green and brown earthenware,
white water-lilies were floating, so that she seemed to be enthroned in themidst of a pool.
'Enter, good guests!' she said, and as she spoke they knew that it washer clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps furtherinto the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely surprised and awkward,
like folk that, knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of water, havebeen answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers. But beforethey could say anything, she sprang lightly up and over the lily-bowls, andran laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled softly like thewind in the flowering borders of a river.
'Come dear folk!' she said, taking Frodo by the hand. 'Laugh and bemerry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.' Then lightly she passed themand closing the door she turned her back to it, with her white arms spread outacross it. 'Let us shut out the night!' she said. 'For you are still afraid,
perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. Fearnothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.'
The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them andsmiled. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' said Frodo at last, feeling his heart movedwith a joy that he did not understand. He stood as he had at times stoodenchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him wasdifferent: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeper and nearer tomortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he saidagain. 'Now the joy that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me.
O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water!
O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter!
O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after!
O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!'
Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with surprise to hear himselfsaying such things. But Goldberry laughed.
'Welcome!' she said. 'I had not heard that folk of the Shire were so
sweet-tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light in your eyes and thering in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait forthe Master of the house! He will not be long. He is tending your tiredbeasts.'
The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberrybusied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slendergrace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere behindthe house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught, amongmany a _derry dol_ and a _merry dol_ and a _ring a ding dillo_ the repeatedwords:

Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
'Fair lady!' said Frodo again after a while. 'Tell me, if my asking doesnot seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?'
'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling.
Frodo looked at her questioningly. 'He is, as you have seen him,' shesaid in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.'
'Then all this strange land belongs to him?'
'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be aburden,' she added in a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees and thegrasses and all things growing or living in the land belong each tothemselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom walkingin the forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops under light andshadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.'
A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his thickbrown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He laughed, and going to Goldberry,
took her hand.
'Here's my pretty lady!' he said, bowing to the hobbits. 'Here's myGoldberry clothed all in silver-green with flowers in her girdle! Is the tableladen? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter; milk,
cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for us? Isthe supper ready?'
'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?'
Tom clapped his hands and cried: 'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, andyou had near forgotten! Come now, my merry friends, and Tom will refresh you!
You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your muddycloaks and comb out your tangles!'
He opened the door, and they followed him down a short passage and rounda sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping roof (a penthouse, itseemed, built on to the north end of the house). Its walls were of cleanstone, but they were mostly covered with green hanging mats and yellowcurtains. The floor was flagged, and strewn with fresh green rushes. Therewere four deep mattresses, each piled with white blankets, laid on the flooralong one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench laden with wideearthenware basins, and beside it stood brown ewers filled with water, somecold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set ready beside eachbed.
Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the table,
two on each side, while at either end sat Goldberry and the Master. It was along and merry meal. Though the hobbits ate, as only famished hobbits can eat,
there was no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed to be clear coldwater, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set free their voices. Theguests became suddenly aware that they were singing merrily, as if it waseasier and more natural than talking.
At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly. The guestswere commanded to sit quiet, and were set in chairs, each with a footstool tohis tired feet. There was a fire in the wide hearth before them, and it wasburning with a sweet smell, as if it were built of apple-wood. When everythingwas set in order, all the lights in the room were put out, except one lamp anda pair of candles at each end of the chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came andstood before them, holding a candle; and she wished them each a good night anddeep sleep.
'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!
For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and thewind off the hill-top. Good night!' She passed out of the room with a glimmerand a rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream falling gently awaydownhill over cool stones in the quiet of night.
Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them tried to

muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had meant to ask atsupper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke:
'Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that brought youat that moment?'
Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' saidhe. 'Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Justchance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was no plan of mine, thoughI was waiting for you. We heard news of you, and learned that you werewandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water: all paths leadthat way, down to Withywindle. Old grey Willow-man, he's a mighty singer; andit's hard for little folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom had an errandthere, that he dared not hinder.' Tom nodded as if sleep was taking him again;
but he went on in a soft singing voice:
I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,
green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,
the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter,
to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted.
Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open first in spring and there they linger latest.
By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.
Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating!
He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue:
And that proved well for you 每 for now I shall no longergo down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passingOld Man Willow's house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughterdances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.
He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more question:
the one he most desired to have answered. 'Tell us, Master,' he said, 'aboutthe Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.'
'No, don't!' said Merry and Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright.
'Not now! Not until the morning!'
'That is right!' said the old man. 'Now is the time for resting. Somethings are ill to hear when the world's in shadow. Sleep till the morning-
light, rest on the pillow! Heed no nightly noise! Fear no grey willow!' Andwith that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a candle ineither hand he led them out of the room.
Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blankets were ofwhite wool. They had hardly laid themselves on the deep beds and drawn thelight covers over them before they were asleep.
In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he saw theyoung moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wallof rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that hewas lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle ofhills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood apinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stoodthe figure of a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above hishead and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the darkplain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howling of many wolves.
Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the moon. Thefigure lifted his arms and a light flashed from the staff that he wielded. Amighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed and the wolvesyammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it was borne

the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. 'BlackRiders!' thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs stillechoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the courage toleave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still listening; butall was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep again or wanderedinto some other unremembered dream.
At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change came over hisdreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had waked,
and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream:
_tip-tap, squeak_: the noise was like branches fretting in the wind, twig-
fingers scraping wall and window: _creak, creak, creak._ He wondered if therewere willow-trees close to the house; and then suddenly he had a dreadfulfeeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the willow andlistening to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him again. He satup, and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay down againrelieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: 'Fear nothing! Havepeace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went to sleep again.
It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quiet sleep:
water streaming down gently, and then spreading, spreading irresistibly allround the house into a dark shoreless pool. It gurgled under the walls, andwas rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he thought. It will findits way in, and then I shall drown.' He felt that he was lying in a soft slimybog, and springing up he set his fool on the corner of a cold hard flagstone.
Then he remembered where he was and lay down again. He seemed to hear orremember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight andstarlight and the wind off the hill-top.' A little breath of sweet air movedthe curtain. He breathed deep and fell asleep again.
As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep content,
if logs are contented.
They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom was movingabout the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clappedhis hands, and cried: 'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drewback the yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered thewindows, at either end of the room, one looking east and the other lookingwest.
They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and foundhimself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected tosee turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually hisview was screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far beyondthem the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a palemorning: in the East, behind long clouds like lines of soiled wool stained redat the edges, lay glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of rain to come;
but the light was broadening quickly, and the red flowers on the beans beganto glow against the wet green leaves.
Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool of mist. TheForest was hidden under a fog. It was like looking down on to a sloping cloud-
roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken into
many plumes and billows; the valley of the Withywindle. The stream ran downthe hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand was a
flower-garden and a clipped hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey shavengrass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen.
'Good morning, merry friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern windowwide. A cool air flowed in; it had a rainy smell. 'Sun won't show her facemuch today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wetsky above me. I wakened Goldberry singing under window; but nought wakeshobbit-folk in the early morning. In the night little folk wake up in thedarkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, mymerry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo del! derry del, myhearties! If you come soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you come

late you'll get grass and rain-water!'
Needless to say 每 not that Tom's threat sounded very serious 每 thehobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lolook rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heardabout the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, andsinging here and there outside. The room looked westward over the mist-cloudedvalley, and the window was open. Water dripped down from the thatched eavesabove. Before they had finished breakfast the clouds had joined into anunbroken roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and steadily down. Behindits deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.
As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if it wasflowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing upabove them. They could hear few words, but it seemed plain to them that thesong was a rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the tale ofa river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The hobbitslistened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed the kindlyweather, because it delayed them from departing. The thought of going had beenheavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed now that they wouldnot go further that day.
The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds rolled upto spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could beseen all round the house but falling water. Frodo stood near the open door andwatched the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and go bubblingaway down into the valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round the corner of thehouse, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain 每 and indeed when hesprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his boots. These hetook off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he sat in the largest chair andcalled the hobbits to gather round him.
'This is Goldberry's washing day,' he said, 'and her autumn-cleaning. Toowet for hobbit-folk 每 let them rest while they are able! It's a good day forlong tales, for questions and for answers, so Tom will start the talking.'
He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if speakingto himself, sometimes looking at them suddenly with a bright blue eye underhis deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would get out ofhis chair and dance about. He told them tales of bees and flowers, the ways oftrees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, about the evil things and goodthings, things friendly and things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things,
and secrets hidden under brambles.
As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest, apartfrom themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers where all otherthings were at home. Moving constantly in and out of his talk was Old ManWillow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more than enough,
for it was not comfortable lore. Tom's words laid bare the hearts of trees and
their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with a hatred ofthings that go free upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking,
burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest withoutreason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten woods; and init there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the fathers of thefathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The countless yearshad filled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and with malice. But none weremore dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart was rotten, but his strengthwas green; and he was cunning, and a master of winds, and his song and thoughtran through the woods on both sides of the river. His grey thirsty spirit drewpower out of the earth and spread like fine root-threads in the ground, andinvisible twig-fingers in the air, till it had under its dominion nearly allthe trees of the Forest from the Hedge to the Downs.
Suddenly Tom's talk left the woods and went leaping up the young stream,
over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and worn rocks, and among small flowersin close grass and wet crannies, wandering at last up on to the Downs. Theyheard of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the stone-rings upon the

hills and in the hollows among the hills. Sheep were bleating in flocks. Greenwalls and white walls rose. There were fortresses on the heights. Kings oflittle kingdoms fought together, and the young Sun shone like fire on the redmetal of their new and greedy swords. There was victory and defeat; and towersfell, fortresses were burned, and flames went up into the sky. Gold was piledon the biers of dead kings and queens; and mounds covered them, and the stonedoors were shut; and the grass grew over all. Sheep walked for a while bitingthe grass, but soon the hills were empty again. A shadow came out of darkplaces far away, and the bones were stirred in the mounds. Barrow-wightswalked in the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold fingers, and goldchains in the wind.' Stone rings grinned out of the ground like broken teethin the moonlight.
The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of the Barrow-wightsof the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been heard. But it was not a talethat any hobbit liked to listen to, even by a comfortable fireside far away.
These four now suddenly remembered what the joy of this house had driven fromtheir minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under the very shoulder ofthose dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale and shifted uneasily,
looking aside at one another.
When they caught his words again they found that he had now wandered intostrange regions beyond their memory and beyond their waking thought, intolimes when the world was wider, and the seas flowed straight to the westernShore; and still on and back Tom went singing out into ancient starlight, whenonly the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and they saw that henodded as if he was falling asleep. The hobbits sat still before him,
enchanted; and it seemed as if, under the spell of his words, the wind hadgone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had been withdrawn, anddarkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was filled with thelight of white stars.
Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days had passedFrodo could not tell. He did not feel either hungry or tired, only filled withwonder. The stars shone through the window and the silence of the heavensseemed to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a sudden fearof that silence:
'Who are you, Master?' he asked.
'Eh, what?' said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom.
'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only answer. Tell me, who are you,
alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that'swhat I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river and thetrees; Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first acorn. He made pathsbefore the Big People, and saw the little People arriving. He was here beforethe Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passedwestward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the darkunder the stars when it was fearless 每 before the Dark Lord came from
Outside.'
A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced hastilythrough the panes. When they turned again, Goldberry stood in the door behind,
framed in light. She held a candle, shielding its flame from the draught withher hand; and the light flowed through it, like sunlight through a whiteshell.
'The rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running downhill,
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!'
'And let us have food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are thirsty. Andlong listening's hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!' With that he jumpedout of his chair, and with a bound took a candle from the chimney-shelf andlit it in the flame that Goldberry held; then he danced about the table.
Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared.
Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom andGoldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and half inlaughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and odd the

caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave a single dance,
neither hindering the other, in and out of the room, and round about thetable; and with great speed food and vessels and lights were set in order. Theboards blazed with candles, white and yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. 'Supperis ready,' said Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed all insilver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes' mail. But Tom wasall in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and he had greenstockings.
It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell ofTom's words may have missed one meal or many, but when the food was beforethem it seemed at least a week since they had eaten. They did not sing or evenspeak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after a timetheir hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in mirthand laughter.
After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs thatbegan merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence; and in thesilences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than any they hadknown, and looking into them they saw the sky below them and the stars likejewels in the depths. Then once more she wished them each good night and leftthem by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them withquestions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, andindeed to know much of all the history and doings of the Shire down from dayshardly remembered among the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised them;
but he made no secret that he owed his recent knowledge largely to FarmerMaggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more importance than they hadimagined. 'There's earth under his old feet, and clay on his fingers; wisdomin his bones, and both his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was also clear thatTom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some fashion, news hadreached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo.
Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, thatFrodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fearsthan he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down, andthere was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders.
'Show me the precious Ring!' he said suddenly in the midst of the story:
and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from his pocket, andunfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.
It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big brown-skinnedhand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and laughed. For a second the hobbitshad a vision, both comical and alarming, of his bright blue eye gleamingthrough a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the end of his littlefinger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the hobbits noticednothing strange about this. Then they gasped. There was no sign of Tomdisappearing!
Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air 每 and it vanishedwith a flash. Frodo gave a cry 每 and Tom leaned forward and handed it back tohim with a smile.
Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who haslent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the same andweighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to Frodo to weigh strangelyheavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He was perhaps atrifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of what even Gandalfthought so perilously important. He waited for an opportunity, when the talkwas going again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and theirqueer ways 每 then he slipped the Ring on.
Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checkedan exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his own ring all right,
for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and obviously could not see him.
He got up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards the outer door.
'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in

his shining eyes. 'Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you a-going? Old TomBombadil's not as blind as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand'smore fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and sit down beside me! Wemust talk a while more, and think about the morning. Tom must teach the rightroad, and keep your feet from wandering.'
Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he cameand sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shinetomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful.
But they would do well to start early; for weather in that country was a thingthat even Tom could not be sure of for long, and it would change sometimesquicker than he could change his jacket. 'I am no weather-master,' he said;
'nor is aught that goes on two legs.'
By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his house, overthe western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope in that way tostrike the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the Barrows. He told themnot to be afraid 每 but to mind their own business.
'Keep to the green grass. Don't you go a-meddling with old stone or coldWights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts thatnever falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to passbarrows by on the west-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he taughtthem a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any danger ordifficulty the next day.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them each on theshoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back to their bedroom.
_Chapter 8_
Fog on the Barrow-Downs
That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of them,
he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running in his mind; asong that seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey rain-curtain, andgrowing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver, until at last itwas rolled back, and a far green country opened before him under a swiftsunrise.
The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like a tree-
full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill and through theopen window. Outside everything was green and pale gold.
After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made ready to sayfarewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morning: cool,
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came freshfrom the North-west. Their quiet ponies were almost frisky, sniffing andmoving restlessly. Tom came out of the house and waved his hat and danced uponthe doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good speed.
They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the house, andwent slanting up towards the north end of the hill-brow under which itsheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their ponies up the last steepslope, when suddenly Frodo stopped.
'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We havenever said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!' He was sodistressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear call came ripplingdown. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair was flyingloose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered. A light like the glintof water on dewy grass flashed from under her feet as she danced.

They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless beside her. Theybowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they lookedout from the hill-top over lands under the morning. It was now as clear andfar-seen as it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll in theForest, which could now be seen rising pale and green out of the dark trees inthe West. In that direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green, yellow,
russet under the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine. Tothe South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a distant glint likepale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop in the lowlands andflowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits. Northward beyond thedwindling downs the land ran away in flats and swellings of grey and green andpale earth-colours, until it faded into a featureless and shadowy distance.
Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, ridge behind ridge into the morning, andvanished out of eyesight into a guess: it was no more than a guess of blue anda remote white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky, but it spoke to them,
out of memory and old tales, of the high and distant mountains.
They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and a few stoutstrides would bear them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted to gojogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs towards the Road, whenthey should be leaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones of the hillsstraight towards the Mountains.
Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts. 'Speed now,
fair guests!' she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind in theleft eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun shines!'
And to Frodo she said: 'Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry meeting!'
But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony,
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope behind thehill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.
The air grew warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and thescent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when theyreached the bottom of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small andslender like a sunlit flower against the sky: she was standing still watchingthem, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked she gave aclear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished behind the hill.
Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feetof a steep hill into another deeper and broader valley, and then over theshoulder of further hills, and down their long limbs, and up their smoothsides again, up on to new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was notree nor any visible water: it was a country of grass and short springy turf,
silent except for the whisper of the air over the edges of the land, and highlonely cries of strange birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted, and grewhot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less. Whenthey caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest seemed to besmoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf and root andmould. A shadow now lay round the edge of sight, a dark haze above which theupper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy.
About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and flattened, likea shallow saucer with a green mounded rim. Inside there was no air stirring,
and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode across and looked northwards.
Then their hearts rose, for it seemed plain that they had come further alreadythan they had expected. Certainly the distances had now all become hazy anddeceptive, but there could be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end. Along valley lay below them winding away northwards, until it came to anopening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, there seemed to be no more hills.
Due north they faintly glimpsed a long dark line. That is a line of trees,'
said Merry, 'and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues eastof the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say they were planted in the olddays.'
'Splendid!' said Frodo. 'If we make as good going this afternoon as wehave done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before the Sun sets and

be jogging on in search of a camping place.' But even as he spoke he turnedhis glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher andlooked down upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green mounds, andon some were standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green
gums.
That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight and wentdown into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood a single stone,
standing tall under the sun above, and at this hour casting no shadow. It wasshapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding finger, or morelike a warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun was still at thefearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of the stone. Itwas cool, as if the sun had had no power to warm it; but at that time thisseemed pleasant. There they took food and drink, and made as good a noon-mealunder the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came from 'down underHill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of the day. Theirponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.
Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun and the scentof turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and looking at thesky above their noses: these things are, perhaps, enough to explain whathappened. However, that may be: they woke suddenly and uncomfortably from asleep they had never meant to take. The standing stone was cold, and it cast along pale shadow that stretched eastward over them. The sun, a pale and wateryyellow, was gleaming through the mist just above the west wall of the hollowin which they lay; north, south, and east, beyond the wall the fog was thick,
cold and white. The air was silent, heavy and chill. Their ponies werestanding crowded together with their heads down.
The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western rim.
They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked outin dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before their eyes into a white sea,
and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up to thewalls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads until itbecame a roof: they were shut in a hall of mist whose central pillar was thestanding stone.
They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not quitelose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had had of the line ofthe Road ahead, and they still knew in which direction it lay. In any case,
they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone that nothought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed up as quickly astheir chilled fingers would work.
Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the rim and downthe long northward slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea. As they went downthe mist became colder and damper, and their hair hung lank and dripping ontheir foreheads. When they reached the bottom it was so cold that they haltedand got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became bedewed with grey drops. Then,
mounting their ponies, they went slowly on again, feeling their way by therise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess,
for the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the long valley whichthey had seen in the morning. Once they were through the gap, they had only lokeep on in anything like a straight line and they were bound in the end tostrike the Road. Their thoughts did not go beyond that, except for a vaguehope that perhaps away beyond the Downs there might be no fog.
Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated andwandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Samwas behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley seemedto stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either sideahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he guessed that they wereat last approaching the gap in the hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs.
If they could pass that, they would be free.
'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over his shoulder, and he hurriedforward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and alarm. The dark patches

grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous before himand leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of a headless door,
two huge standing stones. He could not remember having seen any sign of thesein the valley, when he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had passedbetween them almost before he was aware: and even as he did so darkness seemed
to fall round him. His pony reared and snorted, and he fell off. When helooked back he found that he was alone: the others had not followed him.
'Sam!' he called. 'Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don't you keep up?'
There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the stonesshouting wildly: 'Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into the mist andvanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: 'Hoy!
Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the greatstones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off in the directionof the call, and found himself going steeply uphill.
As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and morefrantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it seemed faintand far ahead and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out ofthe mist: and then a cry that sounded like _help, help!_ often repeated,
ending with a last _help!_ that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cutshort. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could towards the cries; butthe light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that itwas impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to beclimbing up and up.
Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when heat last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary, sweating and yetchilled. It was wholly dark.
'Where are you?' he cried out miserably.
There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware that it wasgetting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy wind.
A change was coming in the weather. The mist was flowing past him now inshreds and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was less near andthick. He looked up and saw with surprise that faint stars were appearingoverhead amid the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hissover the grass.
He imagined suddenly that he caught a muffled cry, and he made towardsit; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, andthe starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him that he was now facingsouthwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from thenorth. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. To his right there loomedagainst the westward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood there.
'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid.
'Here!' said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of theground. 'I am waiting for you!'
'No!' said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell onthe ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he looked up,
in time to see a tall dark figure like a shadow against the stars. It leanedover him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a palelight that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then a grip stronger andcolder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and he rememberedno more.
When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall nothingexcept a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was imprisoned, caughthopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he wasprobably already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow-wights about whichwhispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself: flat onhis back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the verydarkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about BilboBaggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of theShire and talking about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage

hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timidhobbit, wailing for some final and desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo wasneither very fat nor very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (andGandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had cometo the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought hardened him.
He found himself stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no longer felt limplike a helpless prey.
As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed allat once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish light wasgrowing round him. It did not at first show him what kind of a place he wasin, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floorbeside him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and there inthe cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were ontheir backs, and their faces looked deathly pale; and they were clad in white.
About them lay many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they lookedcold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains were about theirwaists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by their sides, andshields were at their feet. But across their three necks lay one long nakedsword.
Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The voiceseemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin,
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sadbut horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape themselves:
grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. The night was railing againstthe morning of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth forwhich it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while the songbecame clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived that it had changedinto an incantation:
Cold be hand and heart and bone,
and cold be sleep under stone:
never mare to wake on stony bed,
never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.
He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himselfon one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kindof passage which behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm wasgroping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest, andtowards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him.
At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by theincantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He wondered if he puton the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find someway out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, grieving forMerry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive himself. Gandalf would admitthat there had been nothing else he could do.
But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too strong: hecould not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping in his pocket, andthen fought with himself again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer.
Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay besidehim, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his companions. With whatstrength he had he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and the handbroke off; but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. Therewas a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a snarling noise.
Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at onceback into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of thefog, came the memory of the house down under the Hill, and of Tom singing. He

remembered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small desperate voice hebegan: _Ho! Tom Bombadil!_ and with that name his voice seemed to grow strong:
it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber echoed as if to drum andtrumpet.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his heartbeating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it wascoming down through the ground or through thick walls, an answering voicesinging:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:
His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster.
There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling, andsuddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A low door-
like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond Frodo's feet; and therewas Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of the sunrising red behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the faces ofthe three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did not stir, but the sickly huehad left them. They looked now as if they were only very deeply asleep.
Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing:
Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight!
Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,
Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!
Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty!
Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,
Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.
At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamberfell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailing shriek, fading away intoan unguessable distance; and after that silence.
'Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean grass! Youmust help me bear them.'
Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left thebarrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still,
like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went back in again, andthere was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he wasbearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of gold, silver, copper,
and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He climbed the greenbarrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine.
There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in his hair, andlooked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their backs upon thegrass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a clearand commanding voice:
Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling!
Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen;
Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.
Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open!
To Frodo's great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms, rubbedtheir eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about in amazement, first

at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life on the barrow-top above them;
and then at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and belted with palegold, and jingling with trinkets.
'What in the name of wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circletthat had slipped over one eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over hisface, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he said. 'The men ofCarn D.m came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the spear in myheart!' He clutched at his breast. 'No! No!' he said, opening his eyes. 'Whatam I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?'
'I thought that I was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak ofit. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!'
'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flunghis circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly, as ifhe expected to find his cloak, jacket, and breeches, and other hobbit-garmentslying somewhere to hand.
'You won't find your clothes again,' said Tom, bounding down from themound, and laughing as he danced round them in the sunlight. One would havethought that nothing dangerous or dreadful had happened; and indeed the horrorfaded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw the merry glint inhis eyes.
'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and halfamused. 'Why not?'
But Tom shook his head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out ofthe deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Beglad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now heart and limb!
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a-hunting!'
He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after himFrodo saw him running away southwards along the green hollow between theirhill and the next, still whistling and crying:
Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?
Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?
Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,
White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until hewas hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some time his _hey now! hoy now!
_came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south.
The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran about for a while onthe grass, as he told them. Then they lay basking in the sun with the delightof those that have been wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a friendlyclime, or of people that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake one day tofind that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of promise.
By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). Hereappeared, hat first, over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in anobedient line _six_ ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainlyold Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger, fatter (and older) than their ownponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them anysuch names, but they answered to the new names that Tom had given them for therest of their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed over the browand stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.
'Here are your ponies, now!' he said. 'They've more sense (in some ways)
than you wandering hobbits have 每 more sense in their noses. For they sniffdanger ahead which you walk right into; and if they run to save themselves,
then they run the right way. You must forgive them all; for though theirhearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow-wights is not what they were madefor. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!'
Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments fromtheir packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged to put on someof the thicker and warmer things that they had brought against the oncoming of

winter.
'Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?' askedFrodo.
'He's mine,' said Tom. 'My four-legged friend; though I seldom ride him,
and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides. When your ponies stayedwith me, they got to know my Lumpkin; and they smelt him in the night, andquickly ran to meet him. I thought he'd look for them and with his words ofwisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old Tom's going toride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road; so he needs apony. For you cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, when you're onyour own legs trying to trot beside them.'
The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many times; buthe laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he wouldnot feel happy till he had seen them safe over the borders of his land. 'I'vegot things to do,' he said: 'my making and my singing, my talking and mywalking, and my watching of the country. Tom can't be always near to opendoors and willow-cracks. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.'
It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine and ten, andthe hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had been lunch beside
the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted now off the remainder ofTom's provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that Tom had broughtwith him. It was not a large meal (considering hobbits and the circumstances),
but they felt much better for it. While they were eating Tom went up to themound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he made into a pilethat glistened and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie there 'free to allfinders, birds, beasts. Elves or Men, and all kindly creatures'; for so thespell of the mound should be broken and scattered and no Wight ever come backto it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch set with blue stones, many-
shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue butterflies. He looked long atit, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his head, and saying at last:
'Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was she who long agowore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not forgether!'
For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen,
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold. Theygleamed as he drew them from their black sheaths, wrought of some strangemetal, light and strong, and set with many fiery stones. Whether by somevirtue in these sheaths or because of the spell that lay on the mound, theblades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.
'Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,' he said. 'Sharpblades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east, south, or far awayinto dark and danger.' Then he told them that these blades were forged manylong years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the Dark Lord, butthey were overcome by the evil king of Carn D.m in the Land of Angmar.
'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured, 'yet still some go wandering, sonsof forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding from evil things folk thatare heedless.'
The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke they had avision as it were of a great expanse of years behind them, like a vast shadowyplain over which there strode shapes of Men, tall and grim with bright swords,
and last came one with a star on his brow. Then the vision faded, and theywere back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. They made ready,
packing their bags and lading their ponies. Their new weapons they hung ontheir leather belts under their jackets, feeling them very awkward, andwondering if they would be of any use. Fighting had not before occurred to anyof them as one of the adventures in which their flight would land them.
At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; and thenmounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw thetop of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight on the gold went uplike a yellow flame. Then they turned a shoulder of the Downs and it was

hidden from view.
Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the greatstones standing like a gate, and before long they came to the northern gap androde swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merryjourney with Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, on FattyLumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom sang most ofthe time, but it was chiefly nonsense, or else perhaps a strange languageunknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were mainly those ofwonder and delight.
They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was furtheraway than they had imagined. Even without a fog, their sleep at mid-day wouldhave prevented them from reaching it until after nightfall on the day before.
The dark line they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of bushesgrowing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the further side. Tomsaid that it had once been the boundary of a kingdom, but a very long limeago. He seemed to remember something sad about it, and would not say much.
They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap in the wall, andthen Tom turned due north, for they had been bearing somewhat to the west. Theland was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, but the sunwas already sinking low when at last they saw a line of tall trees ahead, andthey knew that they had come back to the Road after many unexpectedadventures. They galloped their ponies over the last furlongs, and haltedunder the long shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a sloping bank,
and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away below them. At this pointit ran nearly from South-west to North-east, and on their right it fellquickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore many signs of therecent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes full of water. They rodedown the bank and looked up and down. There was nothing to be seen. 'Well,
here we are again at last!' said Frodo. 'I suppose we haven't lost more thantwo days by my short cut through the Forest! But perhaps the delay will proveuseful 每 it may have put them off our trail.'
The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black Riders came
suddenly over them again. Ever since they had entered the Forest they hadthought chiefly of getting back to the Road; only now when it lay beneaththeir feet did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was more thanlikely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road itself. They lookedanxiously back towards the setting sun, but the Road was brown and empty.
'Do you think,' asked Pippin hesitatingly, 'do you think we may bepursued, tonight?'
'No, I hope not tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the nextday. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain. Out east myknowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the Black Land far beyondhis country.'
All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt thathe would know how to deal with Black Riders, if anyone did. They would soonnow be going forward into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but themost vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering twilightthey longed for home. A deep loneliness and sense of loss was on them. Theystood silent, reluctant to make the final parting, and only slowly becameaware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heartand to ride on till dark without halting.
'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that yourown luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along the Road you'llcome upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors looking westward. Thereyou'll find an old inn that is called _The Prancing Pony._ Barliman Butterburis the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards the morningwill speed you upon your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your merry hearts,
and ride to meet your fortune!'
They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once morewith them; but he laughed and refused, saying:

Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders.
Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!
Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's back, and rode upover the bank and away singing into the dusk.
The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight.
'I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,' said Sam. 'He's a cautionand no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and see naught better,
nor queerer. But I won't deny I'll be glad to see this _Prancing Pony_he spokeof. I hope it'll be like _The Green Dragon_ away back home! What sort of folkare they in Bree?'
'There are hobbits in Bree,' said Merry, 'as well as Big Folk. I daresayit will be homelike enough. _The Pony_ is a good inn by all accounts. Mypeople ride out there now and again.'
'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shireall the same. Don't make yourselves too much at home! Please remember -all ofyou 每 that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, ifany name must be given.'
They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the evening.
Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again,
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead.
Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass against mistystars; and under its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it theynow hurried desiring only to find a fire, and a door between them and thenight.
At the Sign of
_Chapter 9_
The Prancing Pony_
Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides Bree itself, there wasStaddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep valley a little furthereastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round Bree-hill andthe villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland only a few milesbroad.
The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short, cheerful andindependent: they belonged to nobody but themselves; but they were morefriendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants ofthe world about them than was (or is) usual with Big People. According totheir own tales they were the original inhabitants and were the descendants ofthe first Men that ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few had
survived the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned againover the Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they werestill there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded into the grass.
In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within ahundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there weremysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing oftheir origin. They were taller and darker than the Men of Bree and werebelieved to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand thelanguages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwardseven as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen.
When they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange forgottentales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friendsof them.
There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land and_they_claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world, one thatwas founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire

colonized. They lived mostly in Staddle though there were some in Bree itself,
especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men. TheBig Folk and the Little Folk (as they called one another) were on friendlyterms, minding their own affairs in their own ways, but both rightly regardingthemselves as necessary parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere else in the world wasthis peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found.
The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much; and theaffairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Occasionally theHobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland, or the Eastfarthing; but though theirlink land was not much further than a day's riding east of the BrandywineBridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. An occasionalBucklander or adventurous Took would come out to the Inn for a night or two,
but even that was becoming less and less usual. The Shire-hobbits referred tothose of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond the borders, as Outsiders,
and took very little interest in them, considering them dull and uncouth.
There were probably many more Outsiders scattered about in the West of theWorld in those days than the people of the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless,
were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any bank and stay only aslong as it suited them. But in the Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits weredecent and prosperous, and no more rustic than most of their distant relativesInside. It was not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there wasmuch coming and going between the Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in theBrandybucks by all accounts.
The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big Folk, mostlyabove the Road, nestling on the hillside with windows looking west. On thatside, running in more than half a circle from the hill and back to it, therewas a deep dike with a thick hedge on the inner side. Over this the Roadcrossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred by a greatgate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road ran out ofthe village. The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside them weresmall lodges for the gatekeepers.
Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the foot of thehill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic onthe roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;
another ancient road crossed the East Road just outside (he dike at thewestern end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of varioussorts had travelled much on it. _Strange as News from Bree_ was still a sayingin the Eastfarthing, descending from those days, when news from North, South,
and East could be heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits used to go moreoften to hear it. But the Northern Lands had long been desolate, and the NorthRoad was now seldom used: it was grass-grown, and the Bree-folk called it theGreenway.
The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper was animportant person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, andinquisitive among the inhabitants, large and small, of the four villages; anda resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostlydwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.
It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his companionscame at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the village. They came tothe West-gate and found it shut, but at the door of the lodge beyond it, therewas a man sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and looked over the gateat them in surprise.
'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly.
'We are making for the inn here,' answered Frodo. 'We are journeying eastand cannot go further tonight.'
'Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what's more, out of the Shire by theirtalk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared atthem darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and let them ride

through.
'We don't often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,' he went on,
as they halted a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon my wondering what businesstakes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?'
'Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a goodplace to discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of the man or the toneof his voice.
'Your business is your own, no doubt,' said the man; 'but it's mybusiness to ask questions after nightfall.'
'We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and to stayat the inn here,' put in Merry. 'I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough for you?
The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had heard.'
'All right, all right!' said the man. 'I meant no offence. But you'llfind maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking youquestions. There's queer folk about. If you go on to _The Pony,_ you'll findyou're oat the only guests.'
He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see inthe lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them curiously. He was glad tohear the gate clang to behind them, as they rode forward. He wondered why theman was so suspicious, and whether any one had been asking for _news of_ aparty of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? He might have arrived, whilethey were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was something in thelook and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.
The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back tohis house. As soon as his back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly inover the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street.
The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached houses, anddrew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and strange to them. Samstared up at the inn with its three storeys and many windows, and felt hisheart sink. He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees, andother creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the course of hisjourney; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of Men and theirtall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring day. Hepictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the inn-yard, andBlack Riders peering out of dark upper windows.
'We surely aren't going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?' heexclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk in these pans, why don't we look for somethat would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.'
'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil recommended it. Iexpect it's homelike enough inside.'
Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes.
It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on land partly cut outof the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor windowswere level with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to a courtyardbetween the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was a largedoorway reached by a few broad steps. The door was open and light streamed outof it. Above the arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a largesignboard: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door waspainted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN BUTTERBUR. Many of thelower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.
As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing a merrysong inside, and many cheerful voices joined loudly in the chorus. Theylistened to this encouraging sound for a moment and then got off their ponies.
The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping.
They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing in theyard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into ashort fat man with a bald head and a red face. He had a white apron on, andwas bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a tray ladenwith full mugs.
'Can we-' began Frodo.

'Half a minute, if you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, andvanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out
again, wiping his hands on his apron.
'Good evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you bewanting?'
'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be managed. Areyou Mr. Butterbur?'
'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!
You're from the Shire, eh?' he said, and then suddenly he clapped his hand tohis forehead, as if trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried. 'Nowwhat does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?'
'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. Myname is Underhill.'
'There now!' said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers. 'It's gone again!
But it'll come back, when I have time to think. I'm run off my feet; but I'llsee what I can do for you. We don't often get a party out of the Shirenowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is such acrowd already in the house tonight as there hasn't been for long enough. Itnever rains but it pours, we say in Bree.
Nob!'
'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where are you, you woolly-footed slow-coach?
'Coming, sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a door, andseeing the travellers, stopped short and stared at them with great interest.
'Where's Bob?' asked the landlord. 'You don't know? Well find him! Double
sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's fiveponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted offwith a grin and a wink.
'Well, now, what was I going to say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping hisforehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight,
my head is going round. There's a party that came up the Greenway from downSouth last night 每 and that was strange enough to begin with. Then there's atravelling company of dwarves going West come in this evening. And now there'syou. If you weren't hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But we've got aroom or two in the north wing that were made special for hobbits, when thisplace was built. On the ground floor as they usually prefer; round windows andall as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable. You'll be wanting supper, Idon't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!'
He led them a short way down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is anice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm thatbusy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard work for two legs,
but I don't get thinner. I'll look in again later. If you want anything, ringthe hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!'
Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemedcapable of an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They foundthemselves in a small and cosy room. There was a bit of bright fire burning onthe hearth, and in front of it were some low and comfortable chairs. There wasa round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a large handbell.
But Nob, the hobbit servant, came bustling in long before they thoughtof ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.
'Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall Ishow you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?'
They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer when Mr.
Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid. There washot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter, and halfa ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show, and homelikeenough to dispel the last of Sam's misgivings (already much relieved by theexcellence of the beer).
The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them.
'I don't know whether you would care to join the company, when you havesupped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your

beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you_,_ if you had amind. We don't get Outsiders 每 travellers from the Shire, I should say,
begging your pardon 每 often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any storyor song you may have in mind. But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lackanything!'
So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their supper(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessarytalk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said itwould be too stuffy. 'I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, andperhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don'tforget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still _on_ thehigh-road and not very far from the Shire!'
'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself! Don't get lost, and don'tforget that it is safer indoors!'
The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gathering waslarge and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used to the light.
This came chiefly from a blazing log-fire, for the three lamps hanging fromthe beams were dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur was standingnear the fire, talking to a couple of dwarves and one or two strange-lookingmen. On the benches were various folk: men of Bree, a collection of localhobbits (sitting chattering together), a few more dwarves, and other vaguefigures difficult to make out away in the shadows and comers.
As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus of welcome fromthe Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had come up theGreenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers tothe Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they caught many names, they wereseldom sure who the names belonged to. The Men of Bree seemed all to haverather botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight,
Goatleaf, Heathertoes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mentionButterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The Mugworts, for instance,
seemed numerous. But most of them had natural names, such as Banks,
Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which were used inthe Shire. There were several Underhills from Saddle, and as they could notimagine sharing a name without being related, they took Frodo to their heartsas a long-lost cousin.
The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo soonfound that some explanation of what he was doing would have to be given. Hegave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which there wasmuch wagging of heads, although neither of these words were much used in theBree-dialect). He said he was thinking of writing a book (at which there wassilent astonishment), _and_ that he and his friends wanted to collectinformation about hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the easternlands.
At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted to writea book, and had had many ears, he would have learned enough for severalchapters in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given a wholelist of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he could go forfurther information. But after a time, as Frodo did not show any _sign_ ofwriting a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions aboutdoings in the Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon foundhimself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around.
The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and tellingflews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There was trouble away inthe South, and it seemed that the Men who had come up the Greenway were on themove, looking for lands where they could find some peace. The Bree-folk weresympathetic, but plainly not very ready to take a large number of strangersinto their little land. One of the travellers, a squint-eyed ill-favouredfellow, was foretelling that more and more people would be coming north in thenear future. 'If room isn't found for them, they'll find it for themselves.

They've a right to live, same as other folk,' he said loudly. The localinhabitants did not look pleased at the prospect.
The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, and it did not at themoment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg for lodgings inhobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were nowfeeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the Shire.
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of theroof of the Town Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and thefattest hobbit in the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came outlike a floured dumpling. But there were several questions asked that madeFrodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been in theShire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who theywere related to.
Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-beaten man, sittingin the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently to the hobbit-talk.
He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was smoking a long-stemmed pipecuriously carved. His legs were stretched out before him, showing high bootsof supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much wear and were nowcaked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-green cloth was drawnclose about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he wore a hood thatovershadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be seen as he watchedthe hobbits.
'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to Mr.
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?'
'Him?' said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye withoutturning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering folk Rangers
we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare talewhen he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he popsup again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; but I haven't seen himabout lately. What his right name is I've never heard: but he's known roundhere as Strider. Goes about at a great pace on his long shanks; though hedon't tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there's no accounting forEast and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the Shire-folk,
begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about him.' But at that moment Mr.
Butterbur was called away by a demand for more ale and his last remarkremained unexplained.
Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had heard orguessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his hand and a nod,
he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As Frodo drew near be threw backhis hood, showing a shaggy head of dark hair necked with grey, and in a palestem face a pair of keen grey eyes.
'I am called Strider,' he said in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to meetyou. Master 每 Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
'He did,' said Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under thestare of those keen eyes.
'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider, 'if I were you, I should stopyour young friends from talking too much. Drink_,_ fire, and chance-meetingare pleasant enough, but, well 每 this isn't the Shire. There are queer folkabout. Though I say it as shouldn't, you may think,' he added with a wrysmile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And there have been even stranger travellersthrough Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face.
Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no furthersign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on Pippin. To his alarm Frodobecame aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success withthe fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic account ofBilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the Speech, andwas drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance.
Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the localhobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people away beyond theRiver; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and had

probably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring thename of Baggins to their minds, especially if there had been inquiries in Breeafter that name.
Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much enjoyingthe attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful of their danger.
Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even mention theRing; and that might well be disastrous.
'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear.
Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The attention ofPippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the hobbits looked at Frodo andlaughed and clapped, thinking that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as wasgood for him.
Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his habitwhen making a speech) fingering the things in his pocket. He felt the Ring onits chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on andvanish out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if mesuggestion came to him from outside, from someone or something a the room. Heresisted the temptation firmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if tokeep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing _any_ mischief. At anyrate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke 'a few suitable words', as theywould have said in the Shire: _We are all very much gratified by the kindnessof your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will help torenew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree;_and then hehesitated and coughed.
Everyone in the room was now looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one of thehobbits. 'A song! A song!' shouted all the others. 'Come on now, master, singus something that we haven't heard before!'
For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began aridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed rather proudof, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that isprobably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only afew words of it are now, as a rule, remembered.
There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his fill.
The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a five-stringed fiddle;
And up and down he runs his bow,
Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.
The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there's good cheer among the guests,
He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.
They also keep a horned cow
as proud as any queen;
But music turns her head like ale,
And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.
And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!
For Sunday there's a special pair,

And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.
The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
and the cat began to wail;
A dish and a spoon on the table danced,
The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail.
The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair;
And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,
Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air.
Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:
'The white horses of the Moon,
They neigh and champ their silver bits;
But their master's been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun'll be rising soon!'
So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead:
He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,
While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
'It's after three!' he said.
They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,
While his horses galloped up in rear,
And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.
Now quicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,
The cow and the horses stood on their heads;
The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the floor.
With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,
And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.
The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.
She hardly believed her fiery eyes;
For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!
There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and the songtickled their fancy. 'Where's old Barley?' they cried. 'He ought to hear this.
Bob ought to learn his cat the fiddle, and then we'd have a dance.' Theycalled for more ale, and began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master! Come onnow! Once more!'
They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song again, whilemany of them joined in; for the tune was well known, and they were quick atpicking up words. It was now Frodo's turn to feel pleased with himself. Hecapered about on the table; and when he came a second time to _the cow jumped

over the Moon,_ he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for he came down,
bang, into a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off the table with acrash, clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their mouths wide forlaughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer disappeared. Hesimply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the floor without leaving ahole!
The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their feet andshouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam, who foundthemselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from adistance. It was plain that many people regarded them now as the companions ofa travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But there was one swarthyBree-lander, who stood looking at them with a knowing and half-mockingexpression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he slipped out ofthe door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had been whisperingtogether a good deal during the evening. Harry the gatekeeper also went outjust behind them..
Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled away under thetables to the dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of histhoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall and took off the Ring. How itcame to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he hadbeen handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that somehow it had slippedon when he stuck out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a moment hewondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it had triedto reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt in theroom. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.
'Well?' said Strider, when he reappeared. 'Why did you do that? Worsethan anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Orshould I say your finger?'
'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.
'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but we had better wait until theuproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. _Baggins, I_ should like aquiet word with you.'
'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name.
'A matter of some importance 每 to us both,' answered Strider, lookingFrodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.'
'Very well,' said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk to youlater.'
Meanwhile an argument was going on by the fireplace. Mr. Butterbur hadcome trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to several conflictingaccounts of the event at the same time.
'I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,' said a hobbit; 'or leastways I didn't seehim, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in a manner ofspeaking.'
'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled.
'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.'
'There's some mistake somewhere,' said Butterbur, shaking his head. Therewas too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing into thin air; or intothick air, as is more likely in this room.'
'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.
'How should I know? He's welcome to go where he will, so long as he paysin the morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.'
'Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn't,' said Mugwortobstinately.
'And I say there's some mistake,' repeated Butterbur, picking up the trayand gathering up the broken crockery.
'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here I
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.'
He came forward into the firelight; but most of the company backed away,
_,_ even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied by

his explanation that he had crawled away quickly under the tables after he hadfallen. Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and there in a
huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One or two gaveFrodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves. The Dwarves andthe two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said good night tothe landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no one was leftbut Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.
Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very probably, thathis house would be full again on many future nights, until the present mysteryhad been thoroughly discussed. 'Now what have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?'
he asked. 'Frightening my customers and breaking up my crocks with youracrobatics!'
'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quiteunintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.'
'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling,
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand 每 and warn_me._ We're a bit suspicious round here of anything out of the way -uncanny,
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.'
'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promiseyou. And now I think I'll be getting to bed. We shall be making an earlystart. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight o'clock?'
'Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with you in private,
Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought to tellyou. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing or two,
I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.'
'Certainly!' said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how many privatetalks he would have before he got to bed, and what they would reveal. Werethese people all in league against him? He began to suspect even oldButterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs.
_Chapter 10_
Strider
Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was nolight. Merry was not there, and the fire had burned low. It was not until theyhad puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots thatthey discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting in achair by the door!
'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?'
'I am called Strider,' he answered: 'and though he may have forgotten it,
your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.'
'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,' said Frodo.
'What have you to say?'
'Several things,' answered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply.
'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know, andgive you some good advice 每 but I shall want a reward.'
'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he hadfallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he had brought onlya little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he couldnot spare any of it.
'No more than you can afford,' answered Strider with a slow smile, as ifhe guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you,
until I wish to leave you.'
'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if Iwanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I knew agood deal more about you, and your business.'
'Excellent!' exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting backcomfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to

the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell youwhat I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, whenyou have heard me.'
'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?'
'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for yourbusiness -' He got up and went to the door, opened it quickly and looked out.
Then he shut it quietly and sat down again. 'I have quick ears,' he went on,
lowering his voice, 'and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted many wildand wary things and I can usually avoid being seen, if I wish. Now, I wasbehind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits cameout of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to old Bombadil orto one another, but one thing interested me. _Please remember,_ said one ofthem, _that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if anyname must be given._ That interested me so much that I followed them here. Islipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr. Baggins has an honest reasonfor leaving his name behind; but if so, I should advise him and his friends tobe more careful.'
'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' said Frodoangrily, 'and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr. Strider may havean honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but if so, I should advise himto explain it.'
'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple:
I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted to find himquickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secretthat concerned me and my friends.
'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Samjumped up with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of the secret than you do. Andcare is needed!' He leaned forward and looked at them. 'Watch every shadow!'
he said in a low voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. On Mondayone came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared later, coming upthe Greenway from the south.'
There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought tohave guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said. 'And thelandlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join thecompany? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have stayedquiet in here.'
'It would have been better,' said Strider. 'I would have stopped yourgoing into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me into see you, or take a message.'
'Do you think he每每每' began Frodo.
'No, I don't think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not altogetherlike mysterious vagabonds of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled look. 'Well, Ihave rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a curl of his lipand a queer gleam in his eye. 'But I hope we shall get to know one anotherbetter. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened at the end of yoursong. For that little prank每每每'
'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo.
'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That accident has made yourposition dangerous.'
'Hardly more than it was already,' said Frodo. 'I knew these horsemenwere pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to havegone away.'
'You must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return.
And more are coming. There are others. I know their number. I know theseRiders.' He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard. 'And there are some folkin Bree who are not to be trusted,' he went on. 'Bill Ferny, for instance. Hehas an evil name in the Bree-land, and queer folk call at his house. You musthave noticed him among the company: a swarthy sneering fellow. He was veryclose with one of the Southern strangers, and they slipped out together just

after your "accident". Not all of those Southerners mean well; and as forFerny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make mischief for amusement.'
'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?' saidFrodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.
'News of you, of course,' answered Strider. 'An account of yourperformance would be very interesting to certain people. After that they wouldhardly need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely thatthey will hear of it before this night is over. Is that enough? You can do asyou like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may say that I knowall the lands between the Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I have wanderedover them for many years. I am older than I look. I might prove useful. Youwill have to leave the open road after tonight; for the horsemen will watch itnight and day. You may escape from Bree, and be allowed to go forward whilethe Sun is up; but you won't go far. They will come on you in the wild, insome dark place where there is no help. Do you wish them to find you? They areterrible!'
The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face was drawnas if with pain, and his hands clenched the arms of his chair. The room wasvery quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a while hesat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening to soundsin the Night far away.
'There!' he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his brow.
'Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You fear them, but youdo not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you can.
Strider can take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you have him?'
There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was confusedwith doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master; and at last hebroke out:
'With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'd say no! This Strider here, he warns andhe says take care; and I _say yes_ to that, and let's begin with him. He comesout of the Wild, and I never heard no good of such folk. He knows something,
that's plain, and more than I like; but it's no reason why we should let himgo leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he puts it.'
Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam,
but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away.
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really asyou choose to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your voicehas changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should warn usto take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who areyou? What do you really know about 每 about my business; and how do you knowit?'
'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grimsmile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never getto Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You mustmake up your mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help youto do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already?
Still here it is每每每'
At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur had arrived
with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider withdrewinto a dark corner.
'I've come to bid you good night,' said the landlord, putting the candleson the table. 'Nob! Take the water to the rooms!' He came in and shut the
door.
'It's like this,' he began, hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I'vedone any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'lladmit; and I'm a busy man. But first one thing and then another this week havejogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, I wasasked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of Bagginsin particular.'

'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo.
'Ah! you know best,' said the landlord, knowingly. 'I won't give youaway; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the name ofUnderhill, and I was given a description that fits you well enough, if I maysay so.'
'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.
_'A stout little fellow with red cheeks,'_ said Mr. Butterbur solemnly.
Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. _'That won't help you much; it goesfor most hobbits. Barley,_ he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with aglance at Pippin. _'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, andhe has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye._ Begging yourpardon, but he said it, not me.'
_'He_ said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly.
'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is,
but he's a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I don't know what he'llhave to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into a blockof wood, I shouldn't wonder. He's a bit hasty. Still what's done can't beundone. '
'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slowunravelling of Butterbur's thoughts.
'Where was I?' said the landlord, pausing and snapping his fingers. 'Ah,
yes! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my room without aknock. _Barley,_ he says, _I'm off in the morning. Will you do something forme? You've only to name it,_ I said. _I'm in a hurry,_ said he, _and I've notime myself, but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you anyone you cansend, and trust to go? I can find someone,_ I said, _tomorrow, maybe, or theday after. Make it tomorrow,_ he says, and then he gave me a letter.
'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr. Butterbur, producing a letterfrom his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly (he valued hisreputation as a lettered man):
_Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE._
'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo.
'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?'
'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that letter at once, andexplain why you never sent it. That's what you came to tell me, I suppose,
though you've taken a long time to come to the point.'
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. 'You're right, master,' he said, 'andI beg your pardon. And I'm mortal afraid of what Gandalf will say, if harmcomes of it. But I didn't keep it back a-purpose. I put it by safe. Then Icouldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day after,
and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing after another droveit out of my mind. I'm a busy man. I'll do what I can to set matters right,
and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it.
'Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. _Barley,_ he saysto me, _this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this waybefore long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that!
But you need ask no questions. And if I'm not with him, he may be in trouble,
and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I'll be grateful,_ hesays. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo.
'These black men,' said the landlord lowering his voice. 'They're lookingfor _Baggins,_ and if they mean well, then I'm a hobbit. It was on Monday, andall the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny, I called it.
Nob, he came and told me that two black men were at the door asking for ahobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid the blackfellows be off, and slammed the door on them; but they've been asking the samequestion all the way to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he's beenasking questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you'd had bite

or sup, he did.'
'He did!' said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light. 'And muchtrouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'
The landlord jumped with surprise. 'You!' he cried. 'You're alwayspopping up. What do you want now?'
'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo. 'He came to offer me his help.'
'Well, you know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, lookingsuspiciously at Strider. 'But if I was in your plight, I wouldn't take up witha Ranger.'
'Then who would you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper whoonly remembers his own name because people shout it at him all day? Theycannot stay in _The Pony_ for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a longroad before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?'
'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur,
looking really scared. 'But why can't you stay here quiet for a bit, Mr.
Underhill? What are all these queer goings on? What are these black men after,
and where do they come from, I'd like to know?'
'I'm sorry I can't explain it all,' answered Frodo. 'I am tired and veryworried, and it's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to warn youthat you will be in danger as long as I am in your house. These Black Riders:
I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from每每每'
'They come from Mordor,' said Strider in a low voice. 'From Mordor,
Barliman, if that means anything to you.'
'Save us!' cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently was knownto him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It is,'
said Frodo. 'Are you still willing to help me?' 'I am,' said Mr. Butterbur.
'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me can do against,
against每每每' he faltered.
'Against the Shadow in the East,' said Strider quietly. 'Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight,
as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he is faraway.'
'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here withouthelp from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to himselfthis evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo's going off has beenheard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing in hisslow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.'
'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo.
'I hope not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks or no spooks, theywon't get in _The Pony_so easy. Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll sayno word. No black man shall pass my doors, while I can stand on my legs. Meand my folk'll keep watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if youcan.'
'In any case we must be called at dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off asearly as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.'
'Right! I'll see to the orders,' said the landlord. 'Good night, Mr.
Baggins 每 Underhill, I should say! Good night 每 now, bless me! Where's yourMr. Brandybuck?'
'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten allabout Merry, and it was getting late. 'I am afraid he is out. He saidsomething about going for a breath of air.'
'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on aholiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll seeyour friend is let in when he comes. I'd better send Nob to look for him. Goodnight to you all!' At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another doubtful lookat Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps retreated down the passage.
'Well?' said Strider. 'When are you going to open that letter?' Frodolooked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to beGandalf's. Inside, written in the wizard's strong but graceful script, was the

following message:
_THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418._
_Dear Frodo,_
_Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had betterleave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at latest.
I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I find that you aregone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree. You can trust thelandlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the Road: a Man, lean,
dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business and will help you.
Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I do not come, Elrond
will advise you._
_Yours in haste_
_GANDALF_.
_PS. Do NOT use It again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel bynight!_
_PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange menon the roads. His true name is Aragorn_.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.
_PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man,
but his memory is like a lumber-room: thing wanted always buried. If heforgets, I shall roast him._
_Fare Well!_
Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam.
'Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!' he said. 'He deservesroasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in Rivendellby now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he was goinginto great danger.'
'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider.
Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf'ssecond postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf's friend atonce?' he asked. 'It would have saved time.'
'Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?' said Strider. 'Iknew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade you to trust mewithout proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend to tellyou all about myself at once. I had to study _you_ first, and make sure ofyou. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. As soon as I had made up mymind, I was ready to tell you whatever you asked. But I must admit,' he addedwith a queer laugh, 'that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. Ahunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship. But there,
I believe my looks are against me.'
'They are 每 at first sight at any rate,' laughed Pippin with suddenrelief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, aswe say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after lyingfor days in hedges and ditches.'

'It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering inthe Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would diefirst, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.'
Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed Striderdubiously. 'How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?' hedemanded. 'You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You mightbe a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with you. Youmight have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have you to sayto that?'
'That you are a stout fellow,' answered Strider; 'but I am afraid my onlyanswer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I couldkill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk. If I wasafter the Ring, I could have it 每 NOW!'
He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed alight, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on thehilt of a sword that had hung concealed by his side. They did not dare tomove. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly.
'But I _am_ the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at themwith his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; andif by life or death I can save you, I will.'
There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. 'Ibelieved that you were a friend before the letter came,' he said, 'or at leastI wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never in theway that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of hisspies would 每 well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.'
'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? _Allthat is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.'_
'Did the verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make outwhat they were about. But how did you know that they were in Gandalf's letter,
if you have never seen it?'
'I did not know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and those verses gowith that name.' He drew out his sword, and they saw that the blade was indeedbroken a foot below the hilt. 'Not much use is it, Sam?' said Strider. 'Butthe time is near when it shall be forged anew.'
Sam said nothing.
'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled.
Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if weare allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave itunnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or twoways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off thepursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.'
'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?'
'It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from here toRivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have a chanceto look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. AfterWeathertop our journey will become more difficult, and we shall have to choosebetween various dangers.'
'When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is,
or what he is doing?'
Strider looked grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came west with him inthe spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire in the lastfew years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We lastmet on the first of May: at Sam Ford down the Brandywine. He told me that hisbusiness with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for Rivendellin the last week of September. As I knew he was at your side, I went away on ajourney of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached him,
and I was not at hand to help.
'I am troubled, for the first time since I have known him. We should havehad messages, even if he could not come himself. When I returned, many days

ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone far and wide that Gandalf wasmissing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of Gildor thattold me this; and later they told me that you had left your home; but therewas no news of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Roadanxiously.'
'Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it 每 withGandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo.
'I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him, except theEnemy himself,' said Strider. 'But do not give up hope! Gandalf is greaterthan you Shire-folk know 每 as a rule you can only see his jokes and toys. Butthis business of ours will be his greatest task.'
Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite ofall the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is thatsilly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in thedark to look for him.'
At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along thepassage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He shut the door hastily,
and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in alarm for amoment before he gasped: 'I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! BlackRiders!'
'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?'
'Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you did notcome back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again and was standingjust outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I shiveredand felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son of deepershade among the shadows across the road, just beyond the edge of thelamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was nohorse.'
'Which way did it go?' asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. Merrystarted, noticing the stranger for the first time. 'Go on!' said Frodo. 'Thisis a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.'
'It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,' continued Merry. 'I triedto follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the cornerand on as far as the last house on the Road.'
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said;
'but it was foolish.'
'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I think. I couldhardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went, and suddenlyI heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the other was whispering,
or hissing. I couldn't hear a word that was said. I did not creep any closer,
because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt terrified, and I turned back,
and was just going to bolt home, when something came behind me and I... I fellover.'
'I found him, sir,' put in Nob. 'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with alantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Justnigh Bill Ferny's house I thought I could see something in the Road. Icouldn't swear to it, but it looked to me as if two men was stooping oversomething, lilting it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot therewas no signs of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He seemedto be asleep. "I thought I had fallen into deep water," he says to me, when Ishook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up andran back here like a hare.'
'I am afraid that's true,' said Merry, 'though I don't know what I said.
I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't knowwhat came over me.'
'I do,' said Strider. 'The Black Breath. The Riders must have left theirhorses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They willknow all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably thatSoutherner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before we

leave Bree.'
'What will happen?' said Merry. 'Will they attack the inn?' 'No, I thinknot,' said Strider. 'They are not all here yet. And in any case that is nottheir way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not openlyattack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they aredesperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before us. Buttheir power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their clutch. Theywill drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers,
and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate onMonday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they left him.'
'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do?'
'Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to have found outwhich those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking north and close to theground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. Butfirst Nob and I will fetch your luggage.'
While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of all that hadhappened since supper. Merry was still reading and pondering Gandalf's letterwhen Strider and Nob returned.
'Well Masters,' said Nob, 'I've ruffled up the clothes and put in abolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation of your headwith a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag 每 Underhill, sir,' he added with a grin.
Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!' he said. 'But what will happen whenthey have penetrated the disguise?'
'We shall see,' said Strider. 'Let us hope to hold the fort tillmorning.'
'Good night to you,' said Nob, and went off to take his part in the watchon the doors.
Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They pushed a lowchair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo saw that thenight was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders ofBree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew thecurtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.
The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards thehearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They talkedfor a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask.
'Jumped over the Moon!' chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in hisblanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see.
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.'
'I hope so,' said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one thehobbits dropped off to sleep.
_Chapter 11_
A Knife in the Dark
As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on Buckland;
a mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank. The house at Crickhollowstood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered out. Afeeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to rest orgo to bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air. As hestared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees; the gateseemed to open of its own accord and close again without a sound. Terrorseized him. He shrank back, and for a moment he stood trembling in the hall.
Then he shut and locked the door.
The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses led with stealthalong the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, and three black figuresentered, like shades of night creeping across the ground. One went to thedoor, one to the corner of the house on either side; and there they stood, asstill as the shadows of stones, while night went slowly on. The house and thequiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly.

There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far away. Thecold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the darkwithout moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed, as if a chill light had beenunsheathed. There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered.
'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing.
At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst andlock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in.
At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out. It rent thenight like fire on a hill-top.
AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE!
Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creepfrom the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did,
out of the back door, through the garden, and over the fields. When he reachedthe nearest house, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the doorstep. 'No,
no, no!' he was crying. 'No, not me! I haven't got it!' It was some timebefore anyone could make out what he was babbling about. At last they got theidea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest.
And then they lost no more time.
FEAR! FIRE! FOES!
The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, that had not beensounded for a hundred years, not since the white wolves came in the FellWinter, when the Brandywine was frozen over.
AWAKE! AWAKE!
Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The blackfigures fled from the house. One of them let fall a hobbit-cloak on the step,
as he ran. In the lane the noise of hoofs broke out, and gathering to agallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there wasthe sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the BlackRiders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow! Sauronwould deal with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew nowthat the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down the guards atthe gate and vanished from the Shire.
In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if some soundor presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert in hischair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the fire, which had been tended andwas burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement.
Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled withthe noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to be curling roundthe house and shaking it; and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly. Heopened his eyes, and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn-yard. Strider haddrawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang. The first greylight of day was in the room, and a cold air was coming through the openwindow.
As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their bedrooms.
When they saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice: the windowshad been forced open and were swinging, and the curtains were flapping; thebeds were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung upon the floor; thebrown mat was torn to pieces.
Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr. Butterbur lookedsleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he said),
but he had never heard a sound.

'Never has such a thing happened in my time!' he cried, raising his handsin horror. 'Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good bolsters ruined andall! What are we coming to?'
'Dark times,' said Strider. 'But for the present you may be left inpeace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind aboutbreakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed ina few minutes.'
Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready, and tofetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies hadvanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they weregone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place.
Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach Rivendell onfoot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well set out for the Moon.
Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was weighingup their strength and courage.
'Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,' he said at last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. 'We should not go muchslower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to walk inany case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count ongetting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take withus; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced togo round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you prepared to carryon your backs?'
'As much as we must,' said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying toshow that he was tougher than he looked (or felt).
'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly.
'Can't anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get acouple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage? I don'tsuppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,' he added,
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it.
'I doubt it,' said the landlord unhappily. 'The two or three riding-
ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, and they're gone. Asfor other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there are veryfew of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I can. I'llrout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.'
'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you had better do that. I am afraid weshall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of startingearly, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown a horn toannounce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.'
'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a crumb, Ihope: we can have breakfast while we wait 每 and sit down to it. Let's get holdof Nob!'
In the end there was more than three hours' delay. Bob came back with thereport that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money in theneighbourhood 每 except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. 'Apoor old half-starved creature it is,' said Bob; 'but he won't part with itfor less than thrice its worth, seeing how you're placed, not if I knows BillFerny.'
'Bill Ferny?' said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beastbolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?'
'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running hometo him, once it got away. I fancy this is only an afterthought of kind MasterFerny's: just a way of increasing his profits from the affair. The chiefdanger is that the poor beast is probably at death's door. But there does notseem any choice. What does he want for it?'
Bill Ferny's price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed atleast three times the pony's value in those pans. It proved to be a bony,
underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying just yet. Mr.
Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence as

some compensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man, and well-off asthings were reckoned in Bree; but thirty silver pennies was a sore blow tohim, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear.
As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turnedout later that only one horse had been actually stolen. The others had beendriven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found wandering in differentcorners of the Bree-land. Merry's ponies had escaped altogether, andeventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs insearch of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for awhile, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom'sears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a veryfair price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well; so onthe whole they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But theynever came to Rivendell.
However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gonefor good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there was a greatcommotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir and heard news of theraid on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed
the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number hadalso disappeared in the night, none other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyedcompanion. Suspicion fell on him at once.
'If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,' saidButterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves and notcome shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But itappeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he hadjoined their party.
After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get togetherfurther supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It was closeon ten o'clock before they at last got off. By that time the whole of Bree wasbuzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of the blackhorsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that Strider theRanger had joined the mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as would last formany uneventful years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle, and manyeven from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road to see the travellersstart. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or hanging out of thewindows.
Strider had changed his mind, and he decided to leave Bree by the mainroad. Any attempt to set off across country at once would only make mattersworse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to see what they were up to,
and to prevent them from trespassing.
They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur withmany thanks. 'I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry oncemore,' said Frodo. 'I should like nothing better than to stay in your house inpeace for a while.'
They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd.
Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted. ButStrider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those thathe stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with Frodo;
next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony, which wasladen with as much of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; butalready it looked less dejected, as if it approved of the change in itsfortunes. Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of them:
a parting present from Nob and Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe forsitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.'
The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped out ofdoors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But as they drew nearto the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick hedge: thelast house in the village. In one of the windows he caught a glimpse of asallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once.
'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more

than half like a goblin.'
Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy black brows,
and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in a sneer. He was smoking ashort black pipe. As they approached he took it out of his mouth and spat.
'Morning, Longshanks!' he said. 'Off early? Found some friends at last?'
Strider nodded, but did not answer. 'Morning, my little friends!' he said tothe others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken up with? That's Stick-at-
naught Strider, that is! Though I've heard other names not so pretty. Watchout tonight! And you, Sammie, don't go ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!' Hespat again.
Sam turned quickly. 'And you. Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out ofsight, or it will get hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an appleleft his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and cursescame from behind the hedge. 'Waste of a good apple,' said Sam regretfully, andstrode on.
At last they left the village behind. The escort of children andstragglers that had followed them got tired and turned back at the South-gate.
Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some miles. It bent to theleft, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet of Bree-hill,
and then it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country. To their leftthey could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes of Staddle on the gentlersouth-eastern slopes of the hill; down in a deep hollow away north of the Roadthere were wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay;
Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.
After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill standingtall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards theNorth. 'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,' said Strider.
'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said Pippin. 'Our last short cut throughwoods nearly ended in disaster.'
'Ah, but you had not got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,
short or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No onewas in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley.
His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the country,
was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on the east,
and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands to WeathertopHill. In that way they would, if all went well, cut off a great loop of theRoad, which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater Marshes. But,
of course, they would have to pass through the marshes themselves, andStrider's description of them was not encouraging.
However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed, if it hadnot been for the disturbing events of the night before, they would haveenjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun wasshining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy andfull of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider guided themconfidently among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves theywould soon have been at a loss. He was taking a wandering course with manyturns and doublings, to put off any pursuit.
'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,' hesaid; 'though I don't think he will follow us himself. He knows the land roundhere well enough, but he knows he is not a match for me in a wood. It is whathe may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far away. Ifthey think we have made for Archet, so much the better.'
Whether because of Strider's skill or for some other reason, they saw nosign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day: neither two-
footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and a few squirrels. Thenext day they began to steer a steady course eastwards; and still all wasquiet and peaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came out of theChetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since they turned aside

from the Road, and they now entered a wide flat expanse of country, much moredifficult to manage. They were far beyond the borders of the Bree-land, out inthe pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the Midge-water Marshes.
The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there theycame upon pools, and wide stretches of reeds and rushes filled with thewarbling of little hidden birds. They had to pick their way carefully to keepboth dry-footed and on their proper course. At first they made fan-progress,
but as they went on, their passage became slower and more dangerous. Themarshes were bewildering and treacherous, and there was no permanent traileven for Rangers to find through their shifting quagmires. The flies began totorment them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that crept uptheir sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
'I am being eaten alive!' cried Pippin. 'Midgewater! There are moremidges than water!'
'What do they live on when they can't get hobbit?' asked Sam, scratchinghis neck.
They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Theircamping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the biting insects wouldnot let them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the reedsand tussocks that from the sound of them were evil relatives of the cricket.
There were thousands of them, and they squeaked all round, _neek-breek, breekneek,_
unceasingly all the night, until the hobbits were nearly frantic.
The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost ascomfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them) had been leftbehind, the midges still pursued them.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him thatfar away there came a light in the eastern sky: it flashed and faded manytimes. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.
'What is the light?' he said to Strider, who had risen, and was standing,
gazing ahead into the night.
'I do not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make out. It islike lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.'
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the whiteflashes, and against them the tall dark figure of Strider, standing silent andwatchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.
They had not gone far on the fifth day when they left the last stragglingpools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land before them begansteadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could now see aline of hills. The highest of them was at the right of the line and a littleseparated from the others. It had a conical top, slightly flattened at thesummit.
'That is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road, which we have left faraway on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far from its foot.
We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I suppose wehad better do so.'
'What do you mean?' asked Frodo.
'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. Itis close to the Road.'
'But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?'
'Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not passthrough Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And anyway, unless byluck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will not be safefor him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find us in thewilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It commands awide view all round. Indeed, there are many birds and beasts in this countrythat could see us, as we stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds areto be trusted, and there are other spies more evil than they are.'
The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up into thepale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them with bright

unfriendly eyes. 'You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!' he
said.
'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo.
'I think,' answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, 'I thinkthe best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can, to make forthe line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I know thatruns at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north and lessopenly. Then we shall see what we shall see.'
All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early evening camedown. The land became drier and more barren; but mists and vapours lay behindthem on the marshes. A few melancholy birds were piping and wailing, until theround red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then an empty silencefell. The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunset glancing through thecheerful windows of Bag End far away.
At the day's end they came to a stream that wandered down from the hillsto lose itself in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its bankswhile the light lasted. It was already night when at last they halted and madetheir camp under some stunted alder-trees by the shores of the stream. Aheadthere loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and treeless backs of thehills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did not sleep atall. The moon was waxing, and in the early night-hours a cold grey light layon the land.
Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a frost inthe air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed, as ifthey had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used to muchwalking on short commons 每 shorter at any rate than what in the Shire theywould have thought barely enough to keep them on their legs. Pippin declaredthat Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been.
'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there isactually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will not go onindefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'
'Do not speak of such things!' said Strider quickly, and with surprisingearnestness.
The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, often rising almostto a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or passesleading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge the hobbitscould see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and dikes, and inthe clefts there still stood the ruins of old works of stone. By night theyhad reached the feet of the westward slopes, and there they camped. It was thenight of the fifth of October, and they were six days out from Bree.
In the morning they found, for the first time since they had left theChetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed it southwards.
It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep as muchhidden as possible from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of the flatsto the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and where it passedover flatter and more open ground on either side of it there were lines oflarge boulders and hewn stones that screened the travellers almost like ahedge.
'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walkedalong one of these avenues, where the stones were unusually large and closelyset. 'I am not sure that I like it: it has a 每 well, rather a barrow-wightishlook. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?'
'No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,'
answered Strider. 'The Men of the West did not live here; though in theirlatter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil that came outof Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along the walls. But longbefore, in the first days of the North Kingdom, they built a great watch-toweron Weathertop, Amon S.l they called it. It was burned and broken, and nothing

remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown on the old hill'shead. Yet once it was tall and fair. It is told that Elendil stood there
watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in the days of the LastAlliance.'
The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old lore,
as well as in the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry; butStrider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low voicemurmured:
Gil-galad was an Elven-king.
Of him the harpers sadly sing:
the last whose realm was fair and free
between the Mountains and the Sea.
His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;
the countless stars of heaven's field
were mirrored in his silver shield.
But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are.
The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's.
'Don't stop!' said Merry.
'That's all I know,' stammered Sam, blushing. 'I learned it from Mr.
Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I wasalways one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters.
He was mighty book-learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote _poetry._ Hewrote what I have just said.'
'He did not make it up,' said Strider. 'It is pan of the lay that iscalled _The Fall of Gil-galad,_ which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must havetranslated it. I never knew that.'
'There was a lot more,' said Sam, 'all about Mordor. I didn't learn thatpart, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that waymyself!'
'Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!'
'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider.
It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of the path,
and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October sun, a grey-greenbank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward slope of the hill Theydecided to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad Concealmentwas no longer possible, and they could only hope that no enemy or spy wasobserving them. Nothing was to be seen moving on the hill. If Gandalf wasanywhere about, there was no sign of him.
On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow, at thebottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dell with grassy sides. There theyleft Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs and luggage. The other threewent on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the crown of thehill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last slope had beensteep and rocky.
On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancientstonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre acairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with fire.
About them the turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the grasswas scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but therewas no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round below them

a wide prospect, for the most pan of lands empty and featureless, except forpatches of woodland away to the south, beyond which they caught here and therethe glint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern side there ran likea ribbon the Old Road, coming out of the West and winding up and down, untilit faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it.
Following its line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains: the nearerfoothills were brown and sombre;
behind them stood taller shapes of grey, and behind those again were highwhite peaks glimmering among the clouds.
'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very cheerless and uninviting itlooks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don'tblame him for not waiting 每 if he ever came here.'
'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was aday or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first. He can ridevery swiftly when need presses.' Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stoneon the top of the cairn; it was flatter than the others, and whiter, as if ithad escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning it in hisfingers. "This has been handled recently,' he said. 'What do you think ofthese marks?'
On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: 'There seems to he a
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said.
'The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,' saidStrider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. Thescratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might meansomething quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use runes,
and they come here sometimes.'
'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry
'I should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and were asign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now.
It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that hehad no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that isso, we must be wary.'
'I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they maymean,' said Frodo 'It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the way,
in front of us or behind us.'
'Perhaps,' said Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was here, and wasin danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that wesaw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess that hewas attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell. He is hereno longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own way toRivendell, as best we can '
'How far is Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The worldlooked wild and wide from Weathertop.
'I don't know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond the_Forsaken Inn,_ a day's journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say itis so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad toreach their journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know howlong it would take me on my own feet, with fair weather and no ill fortunetwelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses theLoudwater that runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight's journeybefore us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.'
'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.'
'It may,' said Strider.
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge.
In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully realized his homelessnessand danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in the quiet andbeloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful Road, leading back westward 每 tohis home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks were moving slowly alongit, going westward; and looking again he saw that three others were creepingeastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched Strider's arm.

'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.
At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the ruined circle,
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.
'What is it?' he whispered.
'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider.
Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered througha cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer bright, for theclear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now overtakenthe sun, as it began to go down. They could all see the black specks, butneither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain; yet somethingtold them that there, far below, were Black Riders assembling on the Roadbeyond the foot of the hill.
'Yes,' said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. 'The enemyis here!'
Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the hill tofind their companions.
Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small dell andthe surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring of clear water in thehillside, and near it footprints not more than a day or two old. In the dellitself they found recent traces of a fire, and other signs of a hasty camp.
There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell nearest to the hill.
Behind them Sam came upon a small store of firewood neatly stacked.
'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever itwas put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.'
Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. 'I wish I had waitedand explored the ground down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to the springto examine the footprints.
'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back. 'Sam and Pippinhave trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangershave been here lately. It is they who left the firewood behind. But there arealso several newer tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one set wasmade, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot now becertain, but I think there were many booted feet.' He paused and stood inanxious thought.
Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted
Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner Strider ledthem somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow with great dislike, nowthat he had heard news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles away.
'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?' he asked impatiently.
'It is getting late, and I don't like this hole: it makes my heart sinksomehow.'
'Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,' answered Strider,
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said atlast, 'I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere betterthat we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight for themoment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by spies. Allwe could do would be to go right out of our way back north on this side of theline of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road iswatched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in thethickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills thecountry is bare and flat for miles.'
'Can the Riders _see?'_ asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem usually to haveused their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is theright word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when yousaw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.'
'I was too careless on the hill-top,' answered Strider. 'I was veryanxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us togo up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see, and the Riderscan use men and other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They themselves

do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast shadows in theirminds, which only the noon sun destroys; and in the dark they perceive manysigns and forms that are hidden from us: then they are most to be feared. Andat all times they smell the blood of living things, desiring and hating it.
Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We can feel their presence 每
it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here, and before we saw them; theyfeel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his voice sank to a whisper, 'theRing draws them.'
'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move Ishall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!'
Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said.
'You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the fire as asign. There is little shelter or defence here, but fire shall serve for both.
Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can all things, but these Ridersdo not love it, and fear those who wield it. Fire is our friend in thewilderness.'
'Maybe,' muttered Sam. 'It is also as good a way of saying "here we are"
as I can think of, bar shouting.'
Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit a fire,
and prepared a meal. The shades of evening began to fall, and it grew cold.
They were suddenly aware of great hunger, for they had not eaten anythingsince breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper. The landsahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly places deserted byall the races of the world. Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but theywere few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of evil sort: trollsmight stray down at times out of the northern valleys of the Misty Mountains.
Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often dwarves, hurrying alongon business of their own, and with no help and few words to spare forstrangers.
'I don't see how our food can be made to last,' said Frodo. 'We have beencareful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but we haveused more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and perhaps more.'
'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry, root, and herb; and Ihave some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving beforewinter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work, and weneed haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables ofElrond's house!'
The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from the edge of thedell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing quickly into shadow.
The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling stars.
Frodo and his companions huddled round the fire, wrapped in every garment andblanket they possessed; but Strider was content with a single cloak, and sat alittle apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe.
As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out brightly hebegan to tell them tales to keep their minds from fear. He knew many historiesand legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the good and evil deeds of theElder Days. They wondered how old he was, and where he had learned all thislore.
'Tell us of Gil-galad,' said Merry suddenly, when he paused at the end ofa story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you know any more of that old lay that youspoke of?'
'I do indeed,' answered Strider. 'So also does Frodo, for it concerns usclosely.' Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring into the fire.
'I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,' said Frodo slowly.
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is_Starlight_ in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the landof每每每'
'No!' said Strider interrupting, 'I do not think that tale should be toldnow with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the house ofElrond, you may hear it there, told in full.'

'Then tell us some other tale of the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale aboutthe Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more aboutElves; the dark seems to press round so close.'
'I will tell you the tale of Tin~viel,' said Strider, 'in brief 每 for itis a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now, exceptElrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a fair tale,
though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may lift upyour hearts.' He was silent for some time, and then he began not to speak butto chant softly:
The leaves were long, the grass was green,
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,
And in the glade a light was seen
Of stars in shadow shimmering.
Tin~viel was dancing there
To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wander flowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.
Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and fleet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She tightly fled on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.
He heard there oft the flying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,
Or music welling underground,
In hidden hollows quavering.
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.
He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.
Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering.
When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain,
And melting water bubbling.
He saw the elven-flowers spring

About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling.
Again she fled, but swift he came.
Tin~viel! Tin~viel!
He called her by her elvish name;
And there she halted listening.
One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came,
And doom fell on Tin~viel
That in his arms lay glistening.
As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair,
The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tin~viel the elven-fair,
Immortal maiden elven-wise,
About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering.
Long was the way that fate them bore,
O'er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. 'That is a song,' hesaid, 'in the mode that is called _ann-thennath_ among the Elves, but is hardto render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tellsof the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and L~thien Tin~viel. Beren was amortal man, but L~thien was the daughter of Thingol, a King of Elves uponMiddle-earth when the world was young; and she was the fairest maiden that hasever been among all the children of this world. As the stars above the mistsof the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a shining light.
In those days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant,
dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West coming back toMiddle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils which he had stolen;
and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the Enemy was victorious andBarahir was slain, and Beren escaping through great peril came over theMountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the forest ofNeldoreth. There he beheld L~thien singing and dancing in a glade beside theenchanted river Esgalduin; and he named her Tin~viel, that is Nightingale inthe language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they were partedlong. Tin~viel rescued Beren from the dungeons of Sauron, and together theypassed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great Enemy from histhrone, and took from his iron crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest ofall jewels, to be the bride-price of L~thien to Thingol her father. Yet at thelast Beren was slain by the Wolf that came from the gates of Angband, and hedied in the arms of Tin~viel. But she chose mortality, and to die from theworld, so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they met again beyondthe Sundering Seas, and after a brief time walking alive once more in thegreen woods, together they passed, long ago, beyond the confines of thisworld. So it is that L~thien Tin~viel alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed
and left the world, and they have lost her whom they most loved. But from herthe lineage of the Elf-lords of old descended among Men. There live still

those of whom L~thien was the foremother, and it is said that her line shallnever fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and L~thien was
born Dior Thingol's heir; and of him Elwing the White whom E.rendil wedded, hethat sailed his ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heavenwith the Silmaril upon his brow. And of E.rendil came the Kings of N~menor,
that is Westernesse.'
As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit inthe red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich anddeep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared overthe crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon was climbing slowly abovethe hill that overshadowed them, and the stars above the hill-top faded.
The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said Merry.
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.'
The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the top of thehill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moonrise. It wasperhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light.
Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo and Pippinremained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hillintently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creepingover his heart, now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer tothe fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell.
'I don't know what it is,' he said, 'but I suddenly felt afraid. Idurstn't go outside this dell for any money; I felt that something wascreeping up the slope.'
'Did you _see_ anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet.
'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.'
'I saw something,' said Merry; 'or I thought I did 每 away westwards wherethe moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I_thought_ there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be moving thisway.'
'Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Getsome of the longer sticks ready in your hands!'
For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their backsturned to the wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled them.
Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night. Frodo stirred,
feeling that he must break the silence: he longed to shout out aloud.
'Hush!' whispered Strider. 'What's that?' gasped Pippin at the samemoment.
Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, theyfelt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one. Theystrained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon there could be nodoubt:
three or four tall black figures were standing there on the slope,
looking down on them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes inthe deep shade behind them. Frodo thought that he heard a faint hiss as ofvenomous breath and felt a thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowlyadvanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on theground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than hiscompanions; he was quaking as if he was bitter cold, but his terror wasswallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do thislaid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget theBarrow, nor the message of Gandalf; but something seemed to be compelling himto disregard all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope ofescape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt that he musttake the Ring and put it on his finger. He could not speak. He felt Samlooking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great trouble, buthe could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled for a while; butresistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew out the chain, andslipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand.

Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and dark, theshapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath their blackwrappings. There were five tall figures: two standing on the lip of the dell,
three advancing. In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes; undertheir mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs were helms ofsilver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel. Their eyes fell on himand pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword,
and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. Two ofthe figures halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair was longand gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a long sword,
and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that held it glowed witha pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and he heardhimself crying aloud: O _Elbereth! Gilthoniel!_ At the same time he struck atthe feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a painlike a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he swooned hecaught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider leaping out of thedarkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last effortFrodo, dropping his sword, slipped the Ring from his finger and closed hisright hand tight upon it.
_Chapter 12_
Flight to the Ford
When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.
He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning brightly. Histhree companions were bending over him. 'What has happened? Where is the paleking?' he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answerfor a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he gathered fromSam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes coming towardsthem. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had vanished; and atthat moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He heard Frodo'svoice, but it seemed to come from a great distance, or from under the earth,
crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they stumbled over thebody of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the grass with his swordbeneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and lay him near the fire,
and then he disappeared. That was now a good while ago.
Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but whilethey were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of the shadows. Theystarted, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt downswiftly at his side.
'I am not a Black Rider, Sam,' he said gently, 'nor in league with them.
I have been trying to discover something of their movements; but I have foundnothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do not attack again. But thereis no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.'
When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern, andshook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as muchwater as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it.
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up andwalked away, and called Sam to him. 'I think I understand things better now,'
he said in a low voice. 'There seem only to have been five of the enemy. Whythey were not all here, I don't know; but I don't think they expected to beresisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not far, I fear. Theywill come again another night, if we cannot escape. They are only waiting,
because they think that their purpose is almost accomplished, and that theRing cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that they believe your master has adeadly wound that will subdue him to their will. We shall see!' Sam chokedwith tears. 'Don't despair!' said Strider. 'You must trust me now. Your Frodois made of sterner stuff than I had guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it

might prove so. He is not slain, and I think he will resist the evil power ofthe wound longer than his enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and healhim. Guard him well, while I am away!' He hurried off and disappeared againinto the darkness.
Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and adeadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side. His friendswatched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound. The night passed slowlyand wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was filling with greylight, when Strider at last returned.
'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black cloakthat had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem therewas a slash. 'This was the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurtthat it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perishthat pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of Elbereth.'
'And more deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up along thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they sawthat near the end its edge was notched and the point was broken off. But evenas he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for theblade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only thehilt in Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he cried. 'It was this accursed knife that
gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil weapons.
But I will do what I can.'
He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger-hilt laid it on hisknees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting itaside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words the others could notcatch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a plant.
'These leaves,' he said, 'I have walked far to find; for this plant doesnot grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the Road I foundit in the dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his fingers,
and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It is fortunate that I couldfind it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West brought to Middle-
earth. _Athelas_ they named it, and it grows now sparsely and only near placeswhere they dwelt or camped of old; and it is not known in the North, except tosome of those who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues, but over such awound as this its healing powers may be small.'
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. Thefragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt theirminds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some power over the wound, forFrodo felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his side; butthe life did not return to his arm, and he could not raise or use his hand. Hebitterly regretted his foolishness, and reproached himself for weakness ofwill; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not his owndesire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he would remainmaimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue their journey. Hefell too weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They quickly decided toleave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that theenemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here,
then he must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. In anycase we are in great peril here after dark, since the attack of last night,
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.'
As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and packed.
It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the greater part of theirbaggage among the four of them, and put Frodo on the pony. In the last fewdays the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed fatter andstronger, and had begun to show an affection for its new masters, especiallyfor Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must have been very hard for the journey inthe wild to seem so much better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing theRoad, but. it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed

fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night,
while fire would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan toshorten their journey by cutting across another great loop of the Road: eastbeyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards.
They made their way slowly and cautiously round the south-western slopesof the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of the Road. There was nosign of the Riders. But even as they were hurrying across they heard far awaytwo cries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering. Trembling theysprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The land before themsloped away southwards, but it was wild and pathless; bushes and stunted treesgrew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in between. The grass wasscanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were faded andfalling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey was slow and gloomy. Theyspoke little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart was grieved as he watchedthem walking beside him with their heads down, and their backs bowed undertheir burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and heavy-hearted.
Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again,
but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four days passed, without theground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop slowlysank, and before them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer. Yet sincethat far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked theirflight or followed them. They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch in pairsby night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the greynight, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and heard nosound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did they feel thesense of present evil that had assailed them before the attack in the dell. Itseemed too much to hope that the Riders had already lost their trail again.
Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in a narrow place?
At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to rise slowly outof the wide shallow valley into which they had descended. Strider now turnedtheir course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached the topof a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of wooded hills.
Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round the feet of the hills;
and to their right a grey river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine. In thedistance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half-veiled inmist.
"I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,' said Strider.
'We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call Mitheithel. Itflows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of Rivendell, andjoins the Loudwater away in the South. Some call it the Greyflood after that.
It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is no way over it below itssources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last Bridge on which the Roadcrosses.'
'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry.
'That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,' answered Strider. 'TheRoad runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the Bridge to theFord of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we shall cross that water. Oneriver at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last
Bridge held against us.'
Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the borders ofthe Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found no sign of anytravellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed awayall footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see.
They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mileor two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope.
They dreaded to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Stridermade them take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he wentforward to explore.
Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he

said, 'and I wonder very much what that means. But I have found something verystrange.'
He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found itin the mud in the middle of the Bridge,' he said. 'It is a beryl, an elf-
stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I cannot say; but itbrings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we may pass the Bridge; butbeyond that I dare not keep to the Road, without some clearer token.'
At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety, hearing nosound but the water swirling against its three great arches. A mile further onthey came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the steep landson the left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon they were lost ina sombre country of dark trees winding among the feet of sullen hills.
The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous Roadbehind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As theywent forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here and there upon heightsand ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and the ruins oftowers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, who was not walking, had time to gazeahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his journey and thethreatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near theTroll's wood where his first serious adventure had happened. Frodo guessedthat they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance they wouldpass near the spot.
'Who lives in this land?' he asked. 'And who built these towers? Is this
troll-country?'
'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land. Men
once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil people, aslegends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyedin the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But that is now so longago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on theland.'
'Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty andforgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The birds and beasts do not tell tales of thatson.'
'The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,' said Strider; 'andmany more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell.' 'Have you oftenbeen to Rivendell?' said Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt there once,
and still I return when I may.
There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in thefair house of Elrond.'
The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way tothe River Bruinen, but both were now hidden from view. The travellers cameinto a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old andtwisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes ofpine-wood.
The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to picktheir way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbledrocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing for Frodo's sake, andbecause it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.
They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The windbegan to blow steadily out of the West and pour the water of the distant season the dark heads of the hills in fine drenching rain. By nightfall they wereall soaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get any fire toburn. The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper before them, andthey were forced to turn away northwards out of their course. Strider seemedto be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out from Weathertop, andtheir stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It went on raining.
That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall behind them, inwhich there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff. Frodo was restless.
The cold and wet had made his wound more painful than ever, and the ache andsense of deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and turning and

listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks of rock,
water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling fall of a loosened stone. He feltthat black shapes were advancing to smother him; but when he sat up he sawnothing but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking his pipe, andwatching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream, in which hewalked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed faint and dim,
less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking over the hedge.
In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped. The clouds werestill thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue appeared betweenthem. The wind was shifting again. They did not start early. Immediately aftertheir cold and comfortless breakfast Strider went off alone, telling theothers to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he came back. He wasgoing to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie of the land.
When he returned he was not reassuring. 'We have come too far to thenorth,' he said, 'and we must find some way to turn back southwards again. Ifwe keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north ofRivendell. That is troll-country, and little known to me. We could perhapsfind our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but it wouldtake too long, for I do not know the way, and our food would not last. Sosomehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.'
The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground. They founda passage between two hills that led them into a valley running south-east,
the direction that they wished to take; but towards the end of the day theyfound their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark edge againstthe sky was broken into many bare points like teeth of a blunted saw. They hada choice between going back or climbing over it.
They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Beforelong Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so theyoften despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed of finding a path forthemselves, burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they wereall exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They had climbed on to anarrow saddle between two higher points, and the land fell steeply away again,
only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the groundshivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt as if icyclaws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him seemed shadowy anddim.
'We cannot go any further,' said Merry to Strider. 'I am afraid this hasbeen too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we to do?
Do you think they will be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever getthere?'
'We shall see,' answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do inthe wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so anxious topress on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.'
'What is the matter with my master?' asked Sam in a low voice, lookingappealingly at Strider. 'His wound was small, and it is already closed.
There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.'
'Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,' said Strider, 'andthere is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive out. Butdo not give up hope, Sam!'
Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire down under thegnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as ifstone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled together. The wind blewchill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning andsighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark wings weresweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him inall the hollows of the hills.
The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the light paleand clear in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey longedfor the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, Stridertook Merry with him and went to survey the country from the height to the east

of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining brightly when he returned withmore comforting news. They were now going more or less in the right direction.
If they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they would have theMountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a glimpse of theLoudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from view, the Road tothe Ford was not far from the River and lay on the side nearest to them.
'We must make for the Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find apath through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our onlyway to the Ford.'
As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed slowly downthe southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier than they hadexpected, for the slope was far less steep on this side, and before long Frodowas able to ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing anunexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as manyjolts as possible. The spirits of the party rose again. Even Frodo felt betterin the morning light, but every now and again a mist seemed to obscure hissight, and he passed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned round andcalled to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried.
When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake:
there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed with manywindings out of the woods below and faded away on the hill-top behind. Inplaces it was now faint and overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and trees;
but at one time it seemed to have been much used. It was a path made by strongarms and heavy feet. Here and there old trees had been cut or broken down, andlarge rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way.
They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiestway down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they cameinto the dark woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly comingout of a belt of fir-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply tothe left round the comer of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came tothe comer they looked round and saw that the path ran on over a level stripunder the face of a low cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall there wasa door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.
Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamberbehind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam, and Merrypushing with all their strength managed to open the door a little wider, andthen Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the floor lay manyold bones, and nothing else was to be seen near the entrance except some greatempty jars and broken pots.
'Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!' said Pippin. 'Comeout, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made the path -and we hadbetter get off it quick.'
'There is no need, I think,' said Strider, coining out. 'It is certainlya troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don't think we needbe afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.'
The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right againacross the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not likingto show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam andStrider came behind, one on each side of Frodo's pony, for the path was nowbroad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gonevery far before Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both lookedterrified.
'There _are_ trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods notfar below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They are verylarge!'
'We will come and look at them,' said Strider, picking up a stick. Frodosaid nothing, but Sam looked scared.
The sun was now high, and it shone down through the half-strippedbranches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of light. They

halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the tree-trunks, holding theirbreath. There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One was stooping, and theother two stood staring at him.
Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, andbroke his stick upon the stooping troll.
Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the hobbits, andthen even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said. 'We are forgetting our familyhistory! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf, quarrellingover the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.'
'I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew thestory well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact he hadnever more than half believed it. Even now he looked at the stone trolls with
suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them to lifeagain.
'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knewabout trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with a bright sun, and yetyou come back trying to scare me with a tale of live trolls waiting for us inthis glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an oldbird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a live
troll!'
They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder ofBilbo's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm andcomforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little. Theyrested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right under theshadow of the trolls' large legs.
'Won't somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' saidMerry, when they had finished. 'We haven't had a song or a tale for days.'
'Not since Weathertop,' said Frodo. The others looked at him. 'Don'tworry about me!' he added. 'I feel much better, but I don't think I couldsing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.'
'Come on, Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more stored in your head than youlet on about.'
'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain'twhat I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. Butthese old images here brought it to my mind.' Standing up, with his handsbehind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a case in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim,
As should be a-lyin' in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.'
'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead,
Afore I found his shinbone.
Tinbone! Thinbone!
He can spare a share for a poor old troll,
For he don't need his shinbone.'

Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee
Without axin' leave should go makin' free
With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover! Trover!
Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
So hand the old bone over!'
'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins,
'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet!
I'll try my teeth on thee now.
Hee now! See now!
I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins;
I've a mind to dine on thee now.'
But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to larn him.
Warn him! Darn him!
A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to larn him.
But harder than stone is the flesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
As well set your boot to the mountain's root,
For the seat of a troll don't feel it.
Peel it! Heal it!
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.
Tom's leg is game, since home he came,
And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don't care, and he's still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll's old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
'Well, that's a warning to us all!' laughed Merry. 'It is as well youused a stick, and not your hand, Strider!'
'Where did you come by that, Sam?' asked Pippin. 'I've never heard thosewords before.'
Sam muttered something inaudible. 'It's out of his own head, of course,'
said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey. First hewas a conspirator, now he's a jester. He'll end up by becoming a wizard 每 or awarrior!'
'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!'
In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probablyfollowing the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used manyyears before. After a few miles they came out on the top of a high bank abovethe Road. At this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in itsnarrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling andwinding eastward among woods and heather-covered slopes towards the Ford andthe Mountains. Not far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass.
On it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen dwarf-runes andsecret marks.

'There!' said Merry. 'That must be the stone that marked the place wherethe trolls' gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo's share, I wonder,
Frodo?'
Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought home notreasure more perilous, nor less easy to pan with. 'None at all,' he said.
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as itcame from robbers.'
The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening. There was nosign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no other possiblecourse for them to take, they climbed down the bank, and turning left went offas fast as they could. Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off the light of thefast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to meet them from the mountainsahead.
They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where theycould camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought sudden fearback into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them. They looked back, butthey could not see far because of the many windings and rollings of the Road.
As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into thedeep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came to asmall patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the bushes,
they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light, some thirty feelbelow them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They were going fast, with a light_clippety-clippely-clip._ Then faintly, as if it was blown away from them bythe breeze, they seemed to catch a dim ringing, as of small bells tinkling.
'That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listeningintently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not, but they allremained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of pursuit for so long thatany sound from behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was nowleaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his ear, and a look ofjoy on his face.
The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer andnearer now the bells jingled, and _clippety-clip_ came the quick trottingfeet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming in the shadows,
running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall flickered and flashed, as if itwere studded with gems like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behindhim, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in thewind of his speed. To Frodo it appeared that a white light was shining throughthe form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.
Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road, leaping witha cry through the heather; but even before he had moved or called, the riderhad reined in his horse and halted, looking up towards the thicket where theystood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him calling out: _Aina vedui D~nadan! Mae govannen!_ His speech and clear ringing voice left nodoubt in their hearts: the rider was of the Elven-folk. No others that dwelt
in the wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note of
haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speaking quickly andurgently to Strider.
Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes andhurried down to the Road. 'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house ofElrond,' said Strider.
'Hail, and well met at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I was sentfrom Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon theroad.'
'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully.
'No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answeredGlorfindel. 'Elrond received news that troubled him. Some of my kindred,
journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin, learned that things were amiss,
and sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the Nine wereabroad, and that you were astray bearing a great burden without guidance, for

Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openlyagainst the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out north, west, andsouth. It was thought that you might turn far aside to avoid pursuit, andbecome lost in the Wilderness.
'It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of Mitheithel,
and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of the servants ofSauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and I pursued them westward. Icame also upon two others, but they turned away southward. Since then I havesearched for your trail. Two days ago I found it, and followed it over theBridge; and today I marked where you descended from the hills again. But come!
There is no time for further news. Since you are here we must risk the perilof the Road and go. There are five behind us, and when they find your trailupon the Road they will ride after us like the wind. And they are not all.
Where the other four may be, I do not know. I fear that we may find the Fordis already held against us.'
While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deepened. Frodo felta great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began to sink the mistbefore his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a shadow was coming between himand the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt cold. Heswayed, clutching at Sam's arm.
'My master is sick and wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He can't go on ridingafter nightfall. He needs rest.'
Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gentlyin his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety.
Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop, and ofthe deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it tothe Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at it.
'There are evil things written on this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe youreyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach the house of Elrond! Butbe wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of this weaponare beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can 每 but all the more do I urgeyou now to go on without rest.'
He searched the wound on Frodo's shoulder with his fingers, and his facegrew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo felt the chilllessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his shoulder tohis hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed to grow lighterabout him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his friends' faces moreclearly again, and a measure of new hope and strength returned.
'You shall ride my horse,' said Glorfindel. 'I will shorten the stirrupsup to the saddle-skins, and you must sit as tight as you can. But you need notfear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him to bear. Hispace is light and smooth; and if danger presses too near, he will bear youaway with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy cannot rival.'
'No, he will not!' said Frodo. 'I shall not ride him, if I am to becarried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind indanger.'
Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends wouldbe in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and leaveus in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that brings usall in peril.'
To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel'swhite horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and for a time made good speed; butthe hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless feet ofthe Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, and still on under thedeep clouded night. There was neither star nor moon. Not until the grey ofdawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that timenearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the sag ofhis shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream.

They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards from the road-side,
and fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to have closed their eyes whenGlorfindel, who had set himself to watch while they slept, awoke them again.
The sun had now climbed far into the morning, and the clouds and mists of thenight were gone.
'Drink this!' said Glorfindel to them, pouring for each in turn a littleliquor from his silver-studded flask of leather. It was clear as spring waterand had no taste, and it did not feel either cool or warm in the mouth; butstrength and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs as they drank it.
Eaten after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit (which was now allthat they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better than many a goodbreakfast in the Shire had done.
They had rested rather less than five hours when they took to the Roadagain. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only allowed two brief halts duringthe day's march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles beforenightfall, and came to a point where the Road bent right and ran down towardsthe bottom of the valley, now making straight for the Bruinen. So far therehad been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or hear; butoften Glorfindel would halt and listen for a moment, if they lagged behind,
and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he spoke to Strider inthe elf-tongue.
But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the hobbitscould go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy withweariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs. Frodo'spain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows ofghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for then the worldseemed less pale and empty.
The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early next morning.
There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and they hobbledforward at the best pace they could manage.
'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,' saidGlorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'
The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now in placesmuch grass at either side, in which the hobbits walked when they could, toease their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a place where theRoad went suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and then plungedinto a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes ran along asthey hurried forward; and there seemed to be a sound of many footfallsfollowing their own. All at once, as if through a gate of light, the Road ranout again from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at the bottom of asharp incline they saw before them a long flat mile, and beyond that the Fordof Rivendell. On the further side was a steep brown bank, threaded by awinding path; and behind that the tall mountains climbed, shoulder aboveshoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky.
There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind them;
a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through the branches ofthe pines. One moment Glorfindel turned and listened, then he sprang forwardwith a loud cry.
'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!'
The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope.
Glorfindel and Strider followed as rear-guard. They were only half way acrossthe flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of the gatein the trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined his horsein, and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and then another;
then again two more.
'Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo.
He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checkingthe horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders seemed to sit upontheir great steeds like threatening statues upon a hill, dark and solid, while

all the woods and land about them receded as if into a mist. Suddenly he knewin his heart that they were silently commanding him to wait. Then at once fearand hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of hissword, and with a red flash he drew it.
'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he calledto the horse in the elf-tongue: _noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth!_
At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along the lastlap of the Road. At the same moment the black horses leaped down the hill inpursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had heardfilling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was answered;
and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out from the trees and rocks awayon the left four other Riders came flying. Two rode towards Frodo: twogalloped madly towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They seemed to him torun like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as their coursesconverged with his.
Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no longer seehis friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even their great steeds wereno match in speed for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He looked forwardagain, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching the Ford before hewas cut off by the others that had lain in ambush. He could see them clearlynow: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and theywere robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their pale hands; helmswere on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they called to him withfell voices.
Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. Nocry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse's mane. The windwhistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. Abreath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like aflash of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed rightbefore the face of the foremost Rider.
Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt thequick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stonypath. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford.
But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the horsehalted and turned about neighing fiercely. There were Nine Riders at thewater's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before the threat of theiruplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing aseasily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape overthe long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once theRiders crossed. In any case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt.
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.
Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked at thewater and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and brandished hissword.
'Go back!' he cried. 'Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow me nomore! ' His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The Riders halted,
but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him with aharsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To Mordorwe will take you!'
'Go back!' he whispered.
'The Ring! The Ring!' they cried with deadly voices; and immediatelytheir leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by twoothers.
'By Elbereth and L~thien the Fair,' said Frodo with a last effort,
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!'
Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing inhis stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt histongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring. His sword broke and fellout of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost of theblack horses had almost set foot upon the shore.

At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of loud watersrolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below him rise, and down alongits course there came a plumed cavalry of waves. White flames seemed to Frodoto flicker on their crests and he half fancied that he saw amid the water
white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three Riders that werestill in the midst of the Ford were overwhelmed: they disappeared, buriedsuddenly under angry foam. Those that were behind drew back in dismay.
With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to him thathe saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure ofwhite light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms waving flames, that flaredred in the grey mist that was falling over the world.
The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping forward in terrorthey bore their riders into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries weredrowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo felthimself falling, and the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and engulf himtogether with his enemies. He heard and saw no more.
_Chapter 1_
Many Meetings
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that hehad slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edgeof memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it wasflat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longerlooking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound of awaterfall.
`Where am I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the ceiling. 'In theHouse of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in the morning.' said a voice. `It isthe morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want to know.'
`Gandalf!' cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting ina chair by the open window.
`Yes,' he said, `I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after allthe absurd things you have done since you left home.' Frodo lay down again. Hefelt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did not thinkhe would get the better of an argument. He was fully awake now, and the memoryof his journey was returning: the disastrous `short cut' through the OldForest the `accident' at _The Prancing Pony_; and his madness in putting onthe Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking of all thesethings and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arriving inRivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft puffs ofGandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.
'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?'
'Yes, they are all safe and sound,' answered Gandalf. `Sam was here untilI sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.'
`What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow;
and it still does.'
'Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,' answered Gandalf. 'The woundwas overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have been beyondour aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you showed inthe Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. Iwish you could have held out at Weathertop.'
'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. `I have not spokento the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwardsthere were other things to think about. How do you know about it?'
'You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and ithas not been hard for me to read your mind and memory. Do not worry! Though Isaid "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and of theothers. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such dangers,

still bearing the Ring.'
'We should never have done it without Strider,' said Frodo. `But weneeded you. I did not know what to do without you.'
'I was delayed,' said Gandalf, `and that nearly proved our ruin. And yetI am not sure; it may have been better so.'
'I wish you would tell me what happened!'
'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anythingtoday, by Elrond's orders.'
`But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite astiring,' said Frodo. 'I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things thatwant explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at least.'
'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have aCouncil, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say that Iwas held captive.'
'You?' cried Frodo.
'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,' said the wizard solemnly. 'There are manypowers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater than I am. Againstsome I have not yet been measured. But my time is coming. The Morgul-lord andhis Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!'
`Then you knew of the Riders already-before I met them?'
'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the BlackRiders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings. But Idid not know that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you atonce. I heard news of them only after I left you in June; but that story mustwait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.'
'Yes,' said Frodo, `it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of himat first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we metGlorfindel.'
Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about Sam,' he said. 'He has no moredoubts now.'
'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well,
_fond_ is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he is strange,
and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I didn't know that anyof the Big People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just big,
and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked likeBill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except perhapsthe Breelanders.'
`You don't know much even about them, if you think old Barliman isstupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks lessthan he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (asthey say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son ofArathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It maybe that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.'
'Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old Kings?'
said Frodo in wonder. `I thought they had all vanished long ago. I thought hewas only a Ranger.'
'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo, that is just what theRangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of theWest. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the days tocome; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.'
'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But so far my only thought has been to gethere; and I hope I shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant just torest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has been asmuch as I want.'
He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I havebeen reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring the total up to October thetwenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-first. We must have reached the Fordby the twentieth.'
'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.
`How do the side and shoulder feel now?'

'I don't know.' Frodo answered. 'They don't feel at all: which is animprovement, but'-he made an effort-'I can move my arm again a little. Yes, itis coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left hand withhis right.
`Good!' said Gandalf. `It is mending fast. You will soon be sound again.
Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were broughtin.'
'Days?' said Frodo.
`Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought youfrom this where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam hashardly left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is amaster of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you thetruth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment ofthe blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last
night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply buried. and it wasworking inwards.'
Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched blade that hadvanished in Strider's hands. `Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf. `It is gonenow. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very reluctantly. Ihave known strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly have beenovercome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen days.'
`What would they have done to me?' asked Frodo. `What were the Riderstrying to do?'
'They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains in thewound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like they are, only weakerand under their command. You would have became a wraith under the dominion of
the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you for trying to keep his Ring, ifany greater torment were possible than being robbed of it and seeing it on hishand.'
'Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!' said Frodofaintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I shouldnot have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!'
'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf, `not to mentioncourage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced;
and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrowshave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, forthen you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have seizedyou. You could see them, and they could see you.'
`I know,' said Frodo. `They were terrible to behold! But why could we allsee their horses?'
`Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robesthat they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have dealings withthe living.'
`Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other animals areterrified when they draw near, even the elf-horse of Glorfindel. The dogs howland the geese scream at them.'
`Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and
trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have been and still are manyMen, warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet are under hissway. And their number is growing daily.'
`What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?'
`Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear theDark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never again will they listen tohim or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still some of his chief
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. Theydo not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the Blessed Realmlive at once in both worlds, and against both the Seen and the Unseen theyhave great power.'
'I thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not grow dim like

the others. Was that Glorfindel then?'
'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of themighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of a house of princes. Indeed thereis a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: andelsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind inthe Shire. But all such places will soon become islands under siege, if thingsgo on as they are going. The Dark Lord is putting forth all his strength.
`Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. whilehis beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up ourcourage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to death. You are inRivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.'
'I haven't any courage to keep up,' said Frodo, `but I am not worried atthe moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me the end of the affairat the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be content for the present.
After that I shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan't be able to closemy eyes until you have finished the story for me.'
Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo.
The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were clear, and fully awakeand aware. He was smiling, and there seemed to be little wrong with him. Butto the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were oftransparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay outsideupon the coverlet.
`Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. `He is not halfthrough yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can foretell.
Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a clear light foreyes to see that can.'
`You look splendid,' he said aloud. `I will risk a brief tale withoutconsulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again.
This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders made straight foryou, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses anylonger: you had become visible to them, being already on the threshold oftheir world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off theroad, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could saveyou, if the white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, andtoo many to oppose. On foot even Glorfindel and Aragorn together could notwith stand all the Nine at once.
`When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind. Close to theFord there is a small hollow beside the road masked by a few stunted trees.
There they hastily kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood would comedown, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have to deal with anythat were left on his side of the river. The moment the flood appeared, herushed out, followed by Aragorn and the. others with flaming brands. Caughtbetween fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath, theywere dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness. Three were carriedaway by the first assault of the flood; the others were now hurled into thewater by their horses and overwhelmed.'
'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo.
'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished, and without themthey are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so easilydestroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Yourfriends crossed after the flood had passed; and they found you lying on yourface at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under you. The horse wasstanding guard beside you. You were pale and cold, and they feared that youwere dead, or worse. Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towardsRivendell.'
`Who made the flood?' asked Frodo.
'Elrond commanded it,' answered Gandalf. `The river of this valley isunder his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar theFord. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the floodwas released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you may not

have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white horses withshining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For amoment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a wrath, and the floodwould get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in thewaters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.'
`Yes, it all comes back to me now,' said Frodo: 'the tremendous roaring.
I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But now we aresafe!'
Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. 'Yes, you areall safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking tocelebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there inplaces of honour.'
'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel andsuch great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble and showme so much kindness.'
`Well, there are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling. `Iam one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you arethe heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.'
`Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he washere and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow jumpedover the Moon! And the poor old troll!' With that he fell fast asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That housewas, as Bilbo had long ago reported, `a perfect house, whether you like foodor sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or apleasant mixture of them all'. Merely to be there was a cure for weariness,
fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that he nolonger felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, andprobably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed anddiscovered that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever hadbeen. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that fitted himexcellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to see a much thinnerreflection of himself than he remembered: it looked remarkably like the youngnephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but theeyes looked out at him thoughtfully.
`Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of alooking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!'
He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune.
At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came in. He ran toFrodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it gently andthen he blushed and turned hastily away.
`Hullo, Sam!' said Frodo.
`It's warm!' said Sam. `Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt so coldthrough the long nights. But glory and trumpets!' he cried, turning roundagain with shining eyes and dancing on the floor. 'It's fine to see you up andyourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were ready tocome down, and I thought he was joking.'
'I am ready,' said Frodo. 'Let's go and look for the rest of the party!'
`I can take you to them, sir,' said Sam. `It's a big house this, and verypeculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what you'll find rounda corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there! Some like kings,
terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music and thesinging-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening since wegot here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.'
'I know what you have been doing, Sam,' said Frodo, taking his arm. 'Butyou shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart's content. Come on, guideme round the corners!'
Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out into ahigh garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting in

a porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in thevalley below, but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains farabove. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling water was loud, andthe evening was filled with a faint scent of trees and flowers, as if summerstill lingered in Elrond's gardens.
`Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing up. `Here is our noble cousin! Make wayfor Frodo, Lord of the Ring!'
'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch. `Evilthings do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name them.
The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor,
whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting in afortress. Outside it is getting dark.'
`Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,' said Pippin.
`He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to feelgloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the rightsong for the occasion.'
`I feel like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Though at the moment I feelmore like eating and drinking!'
`That will soon be cured,' said Pippin. `You have shown your usualcunning in getting up just in time for a meal.'
`More than meal! A feast!' said Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported thatyou were recovered, the preparations began.' He had hardly finished speakingwhen they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells.
The hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves for the most part,
though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was his custom, satin a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and next to himon the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, ofwhom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were revealedas lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the othertwo; but his long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broadshoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his agedface under great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could leapsuddenly into fire.
Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his facefair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright and keen,
and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in his hand wasstrength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it waswritten the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was darkas the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his eyeswere grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of stars.
Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale as atried warrior in the fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell andmighty among both Elves and Men.
In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall, therewas a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look upon, and solike was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that she wasone of his close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids of her darkhair were touched by no frost, her white arms and clear face were flawless andsmooth, and the light of stars was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudlessnight; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance,
as of one who has known many things that the years bring. Above her brow herhead was covered with a cap of silver lace netted with small gems, glitteringwhite; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament save a girdle of leaveswrought in silver.
So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen; Arwen,
daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of L~thien had come

on earth again; and she was called Und车miel, for she was the Evenstar of herpeople. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin, in L车rien beyondthe mountains, and was but lately returned to Rivendell to her father's house.
But her brothers, Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon errantry: for they rodeoften far afield with the Rangers of the North, forgetting never theirmother's torment in the dens of the orcs.
Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor imaginedin his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find that he had a seatat Elrond's table among all these folk so high and fair. Though he had asuitable chair, and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very small, andrather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feast was merry andthe food all that his hunger could desire. It was some time before he lookedabout him again or even turned to his neighbours.
He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to wait onhis master, but had been told that for this time he was a guest of honour.
Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper end of oneof the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of Strider.
Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richlydressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as white as thesnow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neckhung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him.
'Welcome and well met!' said the dwarf, turning towards him. Then heactually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gl车in at your service,' he said, andbowed still lower.
'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family's,' said Frodo correctly,
rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. 'Am I right in guessing thatyou are _the_ Gl车in, one of the twelve companions of the great ThorinOakenshield?'
`Quite right,' answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions andcourteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. 'And I do not ask, for I havealready been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our friendBilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.'
`Thank you very much,' said Frodo.
'You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,' said Gl车in. 'Iwonder greatly what brings _four_ hobbits on so long a journey. Nothing likeit has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire tooclosely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?'
'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,' said Frodo politely.
He guessed that even in Elrond's house the matter of the Ring was not onefor casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles for a time.
'But I am equally curious,' he added, `to learn what brings so important adwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'
Gl车in looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I think we will not speakyet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long, I believe, andthen we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that may be told.'
Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo listenedmore than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, seemedsmall and far-away and unimportant, while Gl车in had much to tell of events inthe northern regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn the Old, sonof Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, and to their land between theMountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
'lndeed,' said Gl车in, `if it were not for the Beornings, the passage fromDale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible. They are valiant menand keep open the High Pass and the Ford of Carrock. But their tolls arehigh,' he added with a shake of his head; `and like Beorn of old they are notover fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that is much in these days.
Nowhere are there any men so friendly to us as the Men of Dale. They are goodfolk, the Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand son ofBain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm now reaches far south andeast of Esgaroth.'

'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo.
`There is much to tell, good and bad,' said Gl车in; 'yet it is mostlygood: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the shadow ofthese times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you tidings gladly.
But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves' tongues run on when speaking of theirhandiwork, they say.'
And with that Gl车in embarked on a long account of the doings of theDwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a listener; for Frodoshowed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, thoughactually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of people and placesthat he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to hear thatD芍in was still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his twohundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. Of the tencompanions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven were still withhim: Dwalin, Gl车in, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur was now sofat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at table, andit took six young dwarves to lift him.
'And what has become of Balin and Ori and 车in?' asked Frodo.
A shadow passed over Gl车in's face. `We do not know,' he answered. 'It islargely on account of Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those thatdwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!'
Gl车in began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo abouttheir great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. 'We have done well,' hesaid. `But in metalwork we cannot rival our fathers, many of whose. secretsare lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot again make mailor blade to match those that were made before the dragon came. Only in miningand building have we surpassed the old days. You should see the waterways ofDale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You should see the stone-pavedroads of many colours! And the halls and cavernous streets under the earthwith arches carved like trees; and the terraces and towers upon the Mountain'ssides! Then you would see that we have not been idle.'
'I will come and see them, if ever I can,' said Frodo. 'How surprisedBilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!'
Gl车in looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were younot?' he asked.
`Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all the towers andpalaces in the world.'
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went downthe hall, and the company followed them in due order. The doors were thrownopen, and they went across a wide passage and through other doors, and cameinto a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in agreat hearth between the carven pillars upon either side.
Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. `This is the Hall of Fire' saidthe wizard. `Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep awake.
But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people comehere who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all theyear round, but there is little other light.'
As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him, elvishminstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall filled, and Frodo lookedwith delight upon the many fair faces that were gathered together; the goldenfirelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly he noticed,
not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure seated on astool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on the ground was adrinking-cup and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was ill (if people wereever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His headseemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark cloak was drawnover his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. 'Awake littlemaster. he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him.

'Now at last the hour has come that you have wished for, Frodo,' he said.
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.'
The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face.
`Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward.
`Hullo, Frodo my lad!' said Bilbo. `So you have got here at last. I hopedyou would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your honour, Ihear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?'
'Why weren't you there?' cried Frodo. `And why haven't I been allowed tosee you before?'
`Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat byyour side with Sam each day. But as for the feast` I don't go in for suchthings much now. And I had something else to do.'
`What were you doing?'
`Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this is thebest place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!' he said, cocking an eyeat Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness thatFrodo could see. `Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want toknow, you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you have disturbedme-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck over a line or two, and wasthinking about them; but now I don't suppose I shall ever get them right.
There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean outof my head. I shall have to get my friend the D~nadan to help me. Where ishe?'
Elrond laughed. `He shall be found,' he said. `Then you two shall go intoa corner and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before we endour merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though noneknew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast.
In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quicklyand placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, obliviousof the mirth and music in the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say ofhimself. When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along theRoad or in the country on either side; but somehow he had steered all the timetowards Rivendell. `I got here without much adventure,' he said, `and after arest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't travelagain. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here I have been. Ihave done this and that. I have written some more of my book. And, of course,
I make up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to please me, Ithink; for, of course, they aren't really good enough for Rivendell. And Ilisten and I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just is. A remarkableplace altogether.
`I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the South,
but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard about the Ring, of course. Gandalfhas been here often. Not that he has told me a great deal, he has becomecloser than ever these last few years. The D~nadan has told me more. Fancythat ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a pity that Gandalf didnot find out more sooner. I could have brought the thing here myself long agowithout so much trouble. I have thought several times of going back toHobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me: Gandalf andElrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was looking high and lowfor me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught me tottering about in theWild.
'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do no good toyou or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again." Odd sort of remark,
just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let things be. Iam frightfully glad to see you safe and sound.' He paused and looked at Frododoubtfully.
`Have you got it here?' he asked in a whisper. `I can't help feelingcurious, you know, after all I've heard. I should very much like just to peepat it again.'
`Yes, I've got it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It

looks just the same as ever it did.'
`Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo.
When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring had beenhung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out.
Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his distressand amazement he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a shadow seemedto have fallen between them, and through it he found himself eyeing a littlewrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands. He felt a desireto strike him.
The music and singing round them seemed to falter and a silence fell.
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `Iunderstand now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in forthis burden: sorry about everything. Don't adventures ever have an end? Isuppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't behelped. I wonder if it's any good trying to finish my book? But don't let'sworry about it now-let's have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!'
Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly a shred ofmemory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him again. Bilbo smiled andlaughed happily. Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo could tell-aidedand corrected now and again by Sam-was of the greatest interest to him, fromthe felling of the least tree to the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton.
They were so deep in the doings of the Four Farthings that they did not noticethe arrival of a man clad in dark green cloth. For many minutes he stoodlooking down at them with a smile.
Suddenly Bilbo looked up. 'Ah, there you are at last, D~nadan!' he cried.
`Strider!' said Frodo. `You seem to have a lot of names.'
`Well, _Strider_ is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo.
`What do you call him that for?'
`They call me that in Bree,' said Strider laughing, 'and that is how Iwas introduced to him.'
`And why do you call him D~nadan?' asked Frodo.
`_The_ D~nadan,' said Bilbo. `He is often called that here. But I thoughtyou knew enough Elvish at least to know _d~n-udan_: Man of the West,
N~menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!' He turned to Strider.
`Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The LadyArwen was there.'
Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. `I know,' he said. 'But often Imust put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wildunlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.'
`Well, my dear fellow,' said Bilbo, `now you've heard the news, can't youspare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent. Elrond says this songof mine is to be finished before the end of the evening, and I am stuck. Let'sgo off into a corner and polish it up!'
Strider smiled. `Come then!' he said. `Let me hear it!'
Frodo was left to himself for a while. for Sam had fallen asleep. He wasalone and felt rather forlorn` although all about him the folk of Rivendellwere gathered. But those near him were silent, intent upon the music of thevoices and the instruments. and they gave no heed to anything else. Frodobegan to listen.
At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words in elventongues,
even though he understood them little` held him in a spell, as soonas he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took shape, andvisions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet imagined openedout before him; and the firelit hall became like a golden mist above seas offoam that sighed upon the margins of the world. Then the enchantment becamemore and more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of swelling goldand silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous for its pattern to becomprehended; it became part of the throbbing air about him, and it drenched

and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its shining weight into a deep realm ofsleep.
There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned into runningwater, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the voice of Bilbochanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words.
E.rendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;
he built a boat of timber felled
in Nimbrethil to journey in;
her sails he wove of silver fair,
of silver were her lanterns made,
her prow was fashioned like a swan,
and light upon her banners laid.
In panoply of ancient kings,
in chain谷d rings he armoured him;
his shining shield was scored with runes
to ward all wounds and harm from him;
his bow was made of dragon-horn,
his arrows shorn of ebony,
of silver was his habergeon,
his scabbard of chalcedony;
his sword of steel was valiant,
of adamant his helmet tall,
an eagle-plume upon his crest,
upon his breast an emerald.
Beneath the Moon and under star
he wandered far from northern strands,
bewildered on enchanted ways
beyond the days of mortal lands.
From gnashing of the Narrow Ice
where shadow lies on frozen hills,
from nether heats and burning waste
he turned in haste, and roving still
on starless waters far astray
at last he came to Night of Naught,
and passed, and never sight he saw
of shining shore nor light he sought.
The winds of wrath came driving him,
and blindly in the foam he fled
from west to east and errandless,
unheralded he homeward sped.
There flying Elwing came to him,
and flame was in the darkness lit;
more bright than light of diamond
the fire upon her carcanet.
The Silmaril she bound on him
and crowned him with the living light
and dauntless then with burning brow
he turned his prow; and in the night
from Otherworld beyond the Sea
there strong and free a storm arose,
a wind of power in Tarmenel;
by paths that seldom mortal goes
his boat it bore with biting breath
as might of death across the grey

and long-forsaken seas distressed:
from east to west he passed away.
Through Evernight he back was borneon black and roaring waves that rano'er leagues unlit and foundered shoresthat drowned before the Days began,
until he heard on strands of pearlwhen ends the world the music long,
where ever foaming billows rollthe yellow gold and jewels wan.
He saw the Mountain silent rise
where twilight lies upon the kneesof Valinor, and Eldamarbeheld afar beyond the seas.
A wanderer escaped from nightto haven white he came at last,
to Elvenhome the green and fairwhere keen the air, where pale as glassbeneath the Hill of Ilmarin
a-glimmer in a valley sheerthe lamplit towers of Tirionare mirrored on the Shadowmere.
He tarried there from errantry,
and melodies they taught to him,
and sages old him marvels told,
and harps of gold they brought to him.
They clothed him then in elven-white,
and seven lights before him sent,
as through the Calacirianto hidden land forlorn he went.
He came unto the timeless halls
where shining fall the countless years,
and endless reigns theElder Kingin Ilmarin on Mountain sheer;
and words unheard were spoken thenof folk of Men and Elven-kin,
beyond the world were visions showedforbid to those that dwell therein.
A ship then new they built for himof mithril and of elven-glasswith shining prow; no shaven oarnor sail she bore on silver mast:
the Silmaril as lantern lightand banner bright with living flameto gleam thereon by Elberethherself was set, who thither cameand wings immortal made for him,
and laid on him undying doom,
to sail the shoreless skies and come
behind the Sun and light of Moon.
From Evereven's lofty hillswhere softly silver fountains fallhis wings him bore, a wandering light,
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall.
From World's End then he turned awayand yearned again to find afar

his home through shadows journeying,
and burning as an island star
on high above the mists he came,
a distant flame before the Sun,
a wonder ere the waking dawn
where grey the Norland waters run.
And over Middle-earth he passed
and heard at last the weeping sore
of women and of elven-maids
in Elder Days, in years of yore.
gut on him mighty doom was laid,
till Moon should fade, an orb谷d star
to pass, and tarry never more
on Hither Shores where mortals are;
for ever still a herald on
an errand that should never rest
to bear his shining lamp afar,
the Flammifer of Westernesse.
The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that Bilbo was seatedon his stool in a circle of listeners, who were smiling and applauding.
`Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf.
Bilbo got up and bowed. `I am flattered, Lindir,' he said. 'But it wouldbe too tiring to repeat it all.'
'Not too tiring for you,' the Elves answered laughing. 'You know you arenever tired of reciting your own verses. But really we cannot answer yourquestion at one hearing!'
`What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were mine, and whichwere the D~nadan's?'
'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' saidthe Elf.
'Nonsense, Lindir,' snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between aMan and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than I imagined. They're asdifferent as peas and apples.'
'Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,' laughed Lindir.
`Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have otherbusiness.'
'I won't argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much musicand singing. I'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'
He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a lowvoice. `It went off better than I expected. I don't often get asked for asecond hearing. What did you think of it?'
`I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling.
`You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Exceptthat Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think itimportant. I don't know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thingrather above my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses aboutE.rendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was right.'
'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to me to fit somehow, though Ican't explain. I was half asleep when you began, and it seemed to follow onfrom something that I was dreaming about. I didn't understand that it wasreally you speaking until near the end.'
`It _is_ difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it;' saidBilbo. 'Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the elvish appetite formusic and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more.
They will be going on for a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off forsome more quiet talk?'
`Can we?' said Frodo.
`Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as you like, as

long as you don't make a noise.'
They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made for thedoors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on his face. Inspite of his delight in Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of regret as theypassed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold asingle clear voice rose in song.
A Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna m赤riel
o menel aglar elenath!
Na-chaered palan-d赤riel
o galadhremmin ennorath,
Fanuilos, le linnathon
nef aear, s赤 nef aearon!
Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair and thefire was on his face like summer-light upon the trees. Near him sat the LadyArwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn stood beside her; his dark cloakwas thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a star shone onhis breast. They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed to Frodo thatArwen turned towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar andpierced his heart.
He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish songfell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. `It is a song toElbereth,' said Bilbo. `They will sing that, and other songs of the BlessedRealm, many times tonight. Come on!'
He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the gar densand looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There they sat for somewhile, looking through the window at the bright stars above the steep-climbingwoods, and talking softly. They spoke no more of the small news of the Shirefar away, nor of the dark shadows and perils that encompassed them, but of thefair things they had seen in the world together, of the Elves, of the stars,
of trees, and the gentle fall of the bright year in the woods.
At last there came a knock on the door. `Begging your pardon,' said Sam,
putting in his head, `but I was just wondering if you would be wantinganything.'
`And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied Bilbo. `I guess you mean that itis time your master went to bed.'
`Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got uptoday for the first time.'
`Quite right, Sam,' laughed Bilbo. `You can trot off and tell Gandalfthat he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been good tosee you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real good talk.
I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to see yourchapters of our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I think, and look at thestars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!'
_Chapter 2_
The Council of Elrond
Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked alongthe terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sunrise above the far mountains, and shine down. Slanting through the thin silvermist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven nets ofgossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside him, saying nothing. butsniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder in his eyes atthe great heights in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.

On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came uponGandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. `Hullo! Good morning!' said Bilbo. `Feel readyfor the great council?'
`I feel ready for anything,' answered Frodo. `But most of all I shouldlike to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like to get intothose pine-woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of Rivendell tothe north.
'You may have a chance later,' said Gandalf. `But we cannot make anyplans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.'
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. `That is thewarning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cried Gandalf. `Come along now! Bothyou and Bilbo are wanted.'
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path backto the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten, trottedSam.
Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends theevening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in thevalley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from the foaming river-bed. Birdswere singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo his dangerousflight, and the rumours of the darkness growing in the world outside, alreadyseemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces that were turnedto meet them as they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about him.
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gl车in; and in a corner alone Strider was sitting,
clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by hisside, and presented him to the company, saying:
'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever comehither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.'
He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met before. Therewas a younger dwarf at Gl车in's side: his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel therewere several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of whom Erestor was thechief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havens who had come on anerrand from C赤rdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf clad in greenand brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the King of theElves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a tall man with afair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed, proud and stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and indeedthough his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with fur, they werestained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in which a single whitestone was set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he worea great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon his knees. He gazed atFrodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder.
`Here,' said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, `is Boromir, a man from theSouth. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have biddenhim to be present, for here his questions will be answered.'
Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be told. Muchwas said of events in the world outside, especially in the South, and in thewide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already heard manyrumours; but the tale of Gl车in was new to him, and when the dwarf spoke helistened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour of their works ofhand the hearts of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.
`It is now many years ago,' said Gl车in, `that a shadow of disquiet fellupon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began tobe whispered in secret: it was said that we were hemmed in a narrow place, andthat greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some spokeof Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are called in our own tongueKhazad-d.m; and they declared that now at last we had the power and numbers toreturn.'
Gl车in sighed. `Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep wedelved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast mansions lain

empty since the children of Durin fled. But now we spoke of it again withlonging, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors ofKhazad-d.m for many lives of kings, save Thr车r only, and he perished. At last,
however, Balin listened to the whispers, and resolved to go; and though D芍indid not give leave willingly, he took with him Ori and 车in and many of ourfolk, and they went away south.
"That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had news and it seemedgood: messages reported that Moria had been entered and a great work begunthere. Then there was silence, and no word has ever come from Moria since.
"Then about a year ago a messenger came to D芍in, but not from Moria 每
from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called D芍in to his gate. The LordSauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would givefor it, such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning _hobbits_, ofwhat kind they were, and where they dwelt. "For Sauron knows," said he, "thatone of these was known to you on a time."
'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And then hisfell voice was lowered, and he would have sweetened it if he could. "As asmall token only of your friendship Sauron asks this," he said: "that youshould find this thief," such was his word, "and get from him, willing or no,
a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is but a trifle thatSauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will. Find it, and three ringsthat the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be returned to you, and the realmof Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether hestill lives and where, and you shall have great reward and lasting friendshipfrom the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seem so well. Do you refuse?"
'At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who stood byshuddered, but D芍in said: "I say neither yea nor nay. I must consider thismessage and what it means under its fair cloak."
' "Consider well, but not too long," said he.
' "The time of my thought is my own to spend," answered D芍in.
' "For the present," said he, and rode into the darkness.
'Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that night. We needednot the fell voice of the messenger to warn us that his words held both menaceand deceit; for we knew already that the power that has re-entered Mordor hasnot changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the messenger has returned,
and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so he says, is soon to come,
before the ending of the year.
'And so I have been sent at last by D芍in to warn Bilbo that he is soughtby the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this least ofrings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and drawsnearer. We discover that messengers have come also to King Brand in Dale, andthat he is afraid. We fear that he may yield. Already war is gathering on hiseastern borders. If we make no answer, the Enemy may move Men of his rule toassail King Brand, and D芍in also.'
`You have done well to come,' said Elrond. `You will hear today all thatyou need in order to understand the purposes of the Enemy. There is naughtthat you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without it. But you do notstand alone. You will learn that your trouble is but part of the trouble ofall the western world. The Ring! What shall we do with the Ring, the least ofrings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we must deem.
`That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called, I say.
though I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You havecome and are here met, in this very nick of time, by chance as it may seem.
Yet it is not so. Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit here,
and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world.
`Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have been hidden fromall but a few until this day. And first, so that all may understand what isthe peril, the Tale of the Ring shall be told from the beginning even to thispresent. And I will begin that tale, though others shall end it.'
Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of Sauron and the

Rings of Power, and their forging in the Second Age of the world long ago. Apart of his tale was known to some there, but the full tale to none, and manyeyes were turned t= Elrond in fear and wonder as he told of the Elven-smithsof Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness for knowledge,
by which Sauron ensnared them. For in that time he was not yet evil to behold,
and they received his aid and grew mighty in craft, whereas he learned alltheir secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly in the Mountain of Firethe One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was aware of him, and hid theThree which he had made; and there was war, and the land was laid waste, andthe gate of Moria was shut.
Then through all the years that followed he traced the Ring; but sincethat history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond himself set it down in hisbooks of lore, it is not here recalled. For it is a long tale, full of deedsgreat and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke, the sun rode up the sky,
and the morning was passing ere he ceased.
Of N~menor he spoke, its glory and its fall, and the return of the Kingsof Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the Sea, borne upon the wings ofstorm. Then Elendil the Tall and his mighty sons, Isildur and An芍rion, becamegreat lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the South-realm inGondor above the mouths of Anduin. But Sauron of Mordor assailed them, andthey made the Last Alliance of Elves and Men, and the hosts of Gil-galad andElendil were mustered in Arnor.
Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. `I remember well thesplendour of their banners,' he said. `It recalled to me the glory of theElder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and captains wereassembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim was broken,
and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was not so.'
`You remember?' said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in hisastonishment. `But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'Ithought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.'
'So it was indeed,' answered Elrond gravely. `But my memory reaches backeven to the Elder Days. E.rendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin beforeits fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of L~thien ofDoriath. I have seen three ages in the West of the world, and many defeats,
and many fruitless victories.
`I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at theBattle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of Mordor, where we had the mastery:
for the Spear of Gil-galad and the Sword of Elendil, Aiglos and Narsil, nonecould withstand. I beheld the last combat on the slopes of Orodruin, whereGil-galad died, and Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneath him; but Sauronhimself was overthrown, and Isildur cut the Ring from his hand with the hilt-
shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.'
At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. `So that is what became of theRing!' he cried. `If ever such a tale was told in the South, it has long beenforgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that we do not name; but webelieved that it perished from the world in the ruin of his first realm.
Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.'
`Alas! yes,' said Elrond. `Isildur took it, as should not have been. Itshould have been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh at hand where it wasmade. But few marked what Isildur did. He alone stood by his father in thatlast mortal contest; and by Gil-galad only C赤rdan stood, and I. But Isildurwould not listen to our counsel.
' "This I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother," he said;
and therefore whether we would or no, he took it to treasure it. But soon hewas betrayed by it to his death; and so it is named in the North Isildur'sBane. Yet death maybe was better than what else might have befallen him.
'Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a few. Smallwonder it is that you have not heard them, Boromir. From the ruin of theGladden Fields, where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back over themountains after long wandering. One of these was Ohtar, the esquire of

Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them toValandil, the heir of Isildur, who being but a child had remained here inRivendell. But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has notyet been forged again.
`Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance? Not wholly so,
yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed. HisRing was lost but not unmade. The Dark Tower was broken, but its foundationswere not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring, and while itremains they will endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men, and many of theirfriends. had perished in the war. An芍rion was slain, and Isildur was slain;
and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall there be any suchleague of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the Firstborn decrease, and thetwo kindreds are estranged. And ever since that day the race of N~menor hasdecayed, and the span of their years has lessened.
'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields theMen of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann~minas beside LakeEvendim fell into ruin; and the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornoston the high North Downs, and that now too is desolate. Men call it Deadmen'sDike, and they fear to tread there. For the folk of Arnor dwindled, and theirfoes devoured them, and their lordship passed, leaving only green mounds inthe grassy hills.
'In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while itssplendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might of N~menor, ere it fell. Hightowers that people built, and strong places. and havens of many ships; and thewinged crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of many tongues.
Their chief city was Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars. through the midst ofwhich the River flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon,
eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and westward at the feetof the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower of the Setting Sun. Therein the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the seed of that tree whichIsildur brought over the deep waters, and the seed of that tree before camefrom Eress.a, and before that out of the Uttermost West in the Day before dayswhen the world was young.
`But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the line ofMeneldil son of An芍rion failed, and the Tree withered, and the blood of theN~menoreans became mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon thewalls of Mordor slept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth. And on a timeevil things came forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and theymade it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower ofSorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of Guard; andthese two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which lay between wasdeserted and in its ruins shadows walked.
'So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of Minas Tirithstill fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage of the River fromArgonath to the Sea. And now that part of the tale that I shall tell is drawnto its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of allknowledge, and the Three were released from its dominion. But now in thislatter day they are in peril once more, for to our sorrow the One has beenfound. Others shall speak of its finding, for in that I played small part.'
He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, before them.
Give me leave, Master Elrond, said he, first to say more of Gondor; for verilyfrom the land of Gondor I am come. And it would be well for all to know what
passes there. For few, I deem, know of our deeds, and therefore guess littleof their peril, if we should fail at last.
`Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N~menor is spent,
nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of theEast are still restrained, and the terror of Morgul kept at bay; and thusalone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind us, bulwark of theWest. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?
`Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Nameless Enemy has arisen

again. Smoke rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount Doom. The powerof the Black Land grows and we are hard beset. When the Enemy returned ourfolk were driven from Ithilien, our fair domain east of the River, though wekept a foothold there and strength of arms. But this very year, in the days ofJune, sudden war came upon us out of Mordor, and we were swept away. We wereoutnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the Easterlings and the cruelHaradrim; but it was not by numbers that we were defeated. A power was therethat we have not felt before.
`Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horseman, a darkshadow under the moon. Wherever he came a madness filled our foes, but fearfell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnantof our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still stoodamid the ruins of Osgiliath.
'I was in the company that held the bridge, until it was cast down behindus. Four only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and two others.
But still we fight on, holding all the west shores of Anduin; and those whoshelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much praise butlittle help. Only from Rohan now will any men ride to us when we call.
`In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leaguesto Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But I do notseek allies in war. The might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons, it issaid. I come to ask for counsel and the unravelling of hard words. For on theeve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in a troubled sleep; andafterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me.
'In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and there was agrowing thunder, but in the West a pale light lingered, and out of it I hearda voice, remote but clear, crying:
Seek for the Sword that was broken:
In Imladris it dwells;
There shall be counsels taken
Stronger than Morgul-spells.
There shall be shown a token
That Doom is near at hand,
For Isildur's Bane shall waken,
And the Halfling forth shall stand.
Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to our father,
Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of Gondor. This only would hesay, that Imladris was of old the name among the Elves of a far northern dale,
where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, greatest of lore-masters. Therefore mybrother, seeing how desperate was our need, was eager to heed the dream andseek for Imladris; but since the way was full of doubt and danger, I took thejourney upon myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long have Iwandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of which many hadheard, but few knew where it lay.'
'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you' saidAragorn, standing up. He cast his sword upon the table that stood beforeElrond, and the blade was in two pieces. `Here is the Sword that was Broken!'
he said.
`And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?' askedBoromir, looking in wonder at the lean face of the Ranger and his weather-
stained cloak.
`He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,' said Elrond; `and he is descendedthrough many fathers from Isildur Elendil's son of Minas Ithil. He is theChief of the D~nedain in the North, and few are now left of that folk.'
`Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!' cried Frodo in amazement,
springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be demanded at once.
'It does not belong to either of us,' said Aragorn; `but it has beenordained that you should hold it for a while.'

'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. `The time has come.
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.'
There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken by asudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to reveal the Ring, anda loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed andflickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand.
'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond.
Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. `The Halfling!'
he muttered. `Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why thenshould we seek a broken sword?'
'The words were not _the doom of Minas Tirith_,' said Aragorn. `But doomand great deeds are indeed at hand. For the Sword that was Broken is the Swordof Elendil that broke beneath him when he fell. It has been treasured by hisheirs when all other heirlooms were lost; for it was spoken of old among usthat it should be made again when the Ring, Isildur's Bane, was found. Now youhave seen the sword that you have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish forthe House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?'
`I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of ariddle,' answered Boromir proudly. `Yet we are hard pressed, and the Sword ofElendil would be a help beyond our hope-if such a thing could indeed returnout of the shadows of the past.' He looked again at Aragorn, and doubt was inhis eyes.
Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyedon his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a fire shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken:
The crownless again shall be king._
`Not very good perhaps, but to the point 每 if you need more beyond theword of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a hundred and ten days to hear,
you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort.
`I made that up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, `for the D~nadan, a longtime ago when he first told me about himself. I almost wish that my adventureswere not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.'
Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. `For my part Iforgive your doubt,' he said. 'Little do I resemble the figures of Elendil andIsildur as they stand carven in their majesty in the halls of Denethor. I ambut the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I have had a hard life and along; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are a small part in thecount of my journeys. I have crossed many mountains and many rivers, andtrodden many plains, even into the far countries of Rh.n and Harad where thestars are strange.
'But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here the heirs ofValandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for manygenerations. Our days have darkened, and we have dwindled; but ever the Swordhas passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I end.
Lonely men are we, Rangers of the wild, hunters 每 but hunters ever of theservants of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor only.
`If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played anotherpart. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords donot stay. You know little of the lands beyond your bounds. Peace and freedom,
do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear would havedestroyed them. But when dark things come from the houseless hills, or creep

from sunless woods, they fly from us. What roads would any dare to tread, whatsafety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of simple men at night,
if the D~nedain were asleep, or were all gone into the grave?
`And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, andcountrymen give us scornful names. "Strider" I am to one fat man who liveswithin a day's march of foes that would freeze his heart or lay his littletown in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have itotherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple they will be,
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred,
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown.
`But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur'sBane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged. I will come toMinas Tirith.'
`Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. `I have seen a brightring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur perished ere this age of the worldbegan, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has itpassed down the years, until it is brought hither by so strange a messenger?'
`That shall be told,' said Elrond.
`But not yet, I beg, Master!' said Bilbo. `Already the Sun is climbing tonoon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.'
`I had not named you,' said Elrond smiling. `But I do so now. Come! Tellus your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into verse, you may tellit in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.'
`Very well,' said Bilbo. `I will do as you bid. But I will now tell thetrue story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise' 每 he lookedsidelong at Gl车in 每 `I ask them to forget it and forgive me. I only wished toclaim the treasure as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the name ofthief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a little better now.
Anyway, this is what happened.'
To some there Bilbo's tale was wholly new, and they listened withamazement while the old hobbit, actually not at all displeased, recounted hisadventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle. Hewould have given also an account of his party and disappearance from theShire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand.
'Well told, my friend,' he said, `but that is enough at this time. Forthe moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Lethim now speak!'
Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his dealings with theRing from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of his journeyfrom Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned and considered, andeverything that he could recall concerning the Black Riders was examined. Atlast he sat down again.
`Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. `You would have made a good story of it, ifthey hadn't kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes, but we shallhave to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it up. Thereare whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'
`Yes, it made quite a long tale,' answered Frodo. 'But the story stilldoes not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especiallyabout Gandalf.'
Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. `You speak for mealso,' he cried, and turning to Elrond he said: `The Wise may have good reasonto believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long debate,
unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not hear theproofs? And I would ask this also. What of Saruman? He is learned in the loreof the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he knows thethings that we have heard?'
`The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond. `Ihad not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it isthe part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon him last, for it is theplace of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.'

`Some, Galdor,' said Gandalf, `would think the tidings of Gl车in, and thepursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of greatworth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the Nazg.l keep. TheSeven are taken or destroyed.' At this Gl车in stirred, but did not speak. `TheThree we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?
'There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the Mountain,
between the loss and the finding. But the gap in the knowledge of the Wise hasbeen filled at last. Yet too slowly. For the Enemy has been close behind,
closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this year, this verysummer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth.
'Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass thedoors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, and secretly explored his ways, andfound thus that our fears were true: he was none other than Sauron, our Enemyof old, at length taking shape and power again. Some, too, will remember alsothat Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and for long we watchedhim only. Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the Councilput forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood and that was in thevery year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance, if chance it was.
`But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had watched us, andhad long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through MinasMorgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until all was ready. Then he gave waybefore us, but only feigned to flee, and soon after came to the Dark Tower andopenly declared himself. Then for the last time the Council met; for now welearned that he was seeking ever more eagerly for the One. We feared then thathe had some news of it that we knew nothing of. But Saruman said nay, andrepeated what he had said to us before: that the One would never again befound in Middle-earth.
` "At the worst," said he, "our Enemy knows that we have it not and thatit still is lost. But what was lost may yet be found, he thinks. Fear not! Hishope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into Anduin theGreat it fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled down the Riverto the Sea. There let it lie until the End."'
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks ofthe Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so longlain hidden. He sighed.
`There I was at fault,' he said. `I was lulled by the words of Sarumanthe Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril wouldnow be less.'
`We were all at fault,' said Elrond, `and but for your vigilance theDarkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!'
`From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,'
said Gandalf, `and I desired to know how this thing came to Gollum, and howlong he had possessed it. So I set a watch for him, guessing that he would erelong come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but heescaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter rest, watching andwaiting only, as we have too often done.
`Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awakened again tosudden fear. Whence came the hobbit's ring? What, if my fear was true, shouldbe done with it? Those things I must decide. But I spoke yet of my dread tonone, knowing the peril of an untimely whisper, if it went astray. In all thelong wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest foe.
'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that spies of manysorts, even beasts and birds, were gathered round the Shire, and my fear grew.
I called for the help of the D~nedain, and their watch was doubled; and Iopened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.'
`And I,' said Aragorn, `counselled that we should hunt for Gollum. toolate though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's heir shouldlabour to repair Isildur's fault, I went with Gandalf on the long and hopelesssearch.'
Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland,

down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. `There we had
rumour of him, and we guess that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but wenever found him, and at last I despaired. And then in my despair I thoughtagain of a test that might make the finding of Gollum unneeded. The ringitself might tell if it were the One. The memory of words at the Council cameback to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard them nowclearly in my heart.
` "The Nine, the Seven, and the Three," he said, "had each their propergem. Not so the One. It was round and unadorned, as it were one of the lesserrings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could stillsee and read."
`What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The maker.
And Saruman? But great though his lore may be, it must have a source. Whathand save Sauron's ever held this thing, ere it was lost? The hand of Isilduralone.
`With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly to Gondor. Informer days the members of my order had been well received there, but Sarumanmost of all. Often he had been for long the guest of the Lords of the City.
Less welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and grudgingly hepermitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.
' "If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient days, andthe beginnings of the City, read on! " he said. "For to me what was is lessdark than what is to come, and that is my care. But unless you have more skilleven than Saruman, who has studied here long, you will find naught that is notwell known to me, who am master of the lore of this City."
`So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many records that fewnow can read, even of the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues havebecome dark to later men. And Boromir, there lies in Minas Tirith still,
unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself since the kings failed, ascroll that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not march away straight fromthe war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.'
'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in. 'All know in Gondor that hewent first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil,
instructing him, before he committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom. Inthat time he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in memory of hisbrother.'
`But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf; `and that isnot remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns the Ring,
and thus wrote Isildur therein:
_The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; butrecords of it shall be left in Gondor, where also dwell the heirs of Elendil,
lest a time come when the memory of these great matters shall grow dim._
`And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it.
_It was hot when I first took it, hot as a glede, and my hand wasscorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain of it. Yeteven as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it losethneither its beauty nor its shape. Already the writing upon it, which at firstwas as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now only barely to be read. It isfashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they have no letters in Mordorfor such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to be atongue of the Black Land, since it is foul and uncouth. What evil it saith Ido not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade beyond recall. TheRing misseth, maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black and yet burnedlike fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the gold made hot

again, the writing would be refreshed. But for my part I will risk no hurt tothis thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It is precious to me,
though I buy it with great pain._
'When I read these words, my quest was ended. For the traced writing wasindeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and the servants of theTower. And what was said therein was already known. For in the day that Sauronfirst put on the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the Three, was aware of him, andfrom afar he heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes wererevealed.
`At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went northwards,
messages came to me out of L车rien that Aragorn had passed that way, and thathe had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went first to meet him
and hear his tale. Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I dared notguess.'
`There is little need to tell of them,' said Aragorn. `If a man mustneeds walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of MorgulVale, then perils he will have. I, too, despaired at last, and I began myhomeward journey. And then, by fortune, I came suddenly on what I sought: themarks of soft feet beside a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and swift,
and it led not to Mordor but away. Along the skirts of the Dead Marshes Ifollowed it, and then I had him. Lurking by a stagnant mere, peering in thewater as the dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was covered with greenslime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and I was not gentle.
Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks of his teeth. Ideemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back, watching him dayand night, making him walk before me with a halter on his neck, gagged, untilhe was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever towards Mirkwood. Ibrought him there at last and gave him to the Elves, for we had agreed thatthis should be done; and I was glad to be rid of his company, for he stank.
For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but Gandalf came and enduredlong speech with him.'
`Yes, long and weary,' said Gandalf, `but not without profit. For onething, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now toldopenly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had alreadyguessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of the GreatRiver nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he had possessed itlong. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring had lengthened hisyears far beyond their span; but that power only the Great Rings wield.
`And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test that Ispoke of. Upon this very ring which you have here seen held aloft, round andunadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may still be read, if one has thestrength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I havedone, and this I have read:
_Ash nazg durbatul.k, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatul.kagh burzum-ishi krimpatul.'_
The change in the wizard's voice was astounding. Suddenly it becamemenacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to pass over the high sun,
and the porch for a moment grew dark. All trembled, and the Elves stoppedtheir ears.
`Never before has any voice dared to utter the words of that tongue inImladris, Gandalf the Grey,' said Elrond, as the shadow passed and the companybreathed once more.
`And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,' answeredGandalf. `Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, Master Elrond. For if thattongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West, then let all putdoubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the

treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice; and in it lies a greatpart of his strength of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that theSmiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed:
_One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ringto bring them all and in the Darkness bind them._
`Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum. He was lothto speak and his tale was unclear, but it is beyond all doubt that he went toMordor, and there all that he knew was forced from him. Thus the Enemy knowsnow that the One is found, that it was long in the Shire; and since hisservants have pursued it almost to our door, he soon will know, already he mayknow, even as I speak, that we have it here.'
All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. `He is a smallthing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became of him?
To what doom did you put him?'
'He is in prison, but no worse,' said Aragorn. `He had suffered much.
There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of Sauron lies black onhis heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchfulElves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to bebelieved in one so lean and withered. He could work much mischief still, if hewere free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil
errand.'
`Alas! alas!' cried Legolas, and in his fair elvish face there was greatdistress. `The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They are notgood, but only here have I learned how evil they may seem to this company.
Sm谷agol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'
'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue itbitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?'
`Not through lack of watchfulness,' said Legolas; `but perhaps throughover-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and thatmore is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature dayand night, at Gandalf's bidding, much though we wearied of the task. ButGandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not the heart to keep himever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall back into his old blackthoughts.'
'You were less tender to me,' said Gl车in with a flash of his eyes as oldmemories were stirred of his imprisonment in the deep places of the Elven-
king's halls.
'Now come!' said Gandalf. `Pray do not interrupt, my good Gl车in. That wasa regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances thatstand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought up here, we may as wellabandon this Council.'
Gl车in rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. 'In the days of fair weatherwe led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree standing alone farfrom the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up to thehighest branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at thetree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind toclimb after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his feetas well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night.
'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Orcscame on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time; they were many andfierce, but they came from over the mountains, and were unused to the woods.
When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone, and his guards wereslain or taken. It then seemed plain to us that the attack had been made forhis rescue, and that he knew of it beforehand. How that was contrived wecannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many. The

dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon's fall havereturned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place, save whereour realm is maintained.
`We have failed to recapture Gollum. We came on his trail among those ofmany Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south. But ere long itescaped our skill, and we dared not continue the hunt; for we were drawingnigh to Dol Guldur, and that is still a very evil place; we do not go thatway.'
`Well, well, he is gone,' said Gandalf. 'We have no time to seek for himagain. He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither he norSauron have foreseen.
'And now I will answer Galdor's other questions. What of Saruman? Whatare his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for onlyElrond has heard it yet, and that in brief, but it will bear on all that wemust resolve. It is the last chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it hasyet gone.
'At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was on mymind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I had aforeboding of some danger, still hidden from me but drawing near. Theremessages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heardof the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing save a fewfugitives from the South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of whichthey would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along theGreenway; and not far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting on a bankbeside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was Radagast the Brown,
who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the borders of Mirkwood. He is one ofmy order, but I had not seen him for many a year.
` "Gandalf! " he cried. "I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in theseparts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with theuncouth name of Shire."
' "Your information was correct," I said. "But do not put it that way, ifyou meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the borders of the Shire now.
And what do you want with me? It must be pressing. You were never a traveller,
unless driven by great need."
' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he lookedabout him, as if the hedges might have ears. "Nazg.l," he whispered. "The Nineare abroad again. They have crossed the River secretly and are movingwestward. They have taken the guise of riders in black."
'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.
` "The enemy must have some great need or purpose," said Radagast; "butwhat it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannotguess."
` "What do you mean? " said I.
` "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news of aland called Shire."
' "_The_ Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise might fearto withstand the Nine, when they are gathered together under their fellchieftain. A great king and sorcerer he was of old, and now he wields a deadlyfear. "Who told you, and who sent you? " I asked.
' "Saruman the White," answered Radagast. "And he told me to say that ifyou feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it willbe too late."
'And that message brought me hope. For Saruman the White is the greatestof my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy Wizard, a master of shapes andchanges of hue; and he has much lore of herbs and beasts, and birds areespecially his friends. But Saruman has long studied the arts of the Enemyhimself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him. It was by thedevices of Saruman that we drove him from Dol Guldur. It might be that he hadfound some weapons that would drive back the Nine.
' "I will go to Saruman," I said.

' "Then you must go _now_," said Radagast; "for I have wasted time inlooking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to find you beforeMidsummer, and that is now here. Even if you set out from this spot, you willhardly reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. I myselfshall turn back at once." And with that he mounted and would have ridden
straight off.
` "Stay a moment! " I said. "We shall need your help, and the help of allthings that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and birds thatare your friends. Tell them to bring news of anything that bears on thismatter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc."
` "I will do that," he said, and rode off as if the Nine were after him.
`I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very far alreadythat day, and I was as weary as my horse; and I needed to consider matters. Istayed the night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to theShire. Never did I make a greater mistake!
`However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my friend theinnkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last tothe dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard, in the end of theMisty Mountains, not far from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you thatthat is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and thenorthmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. ButIsengard is a circle of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall, andin the midst of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was notmade by Saruman, but by the Men of N~menor long ago; and it is very tall andhas many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot be reachedsave by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is only one
gate.
'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in the wall ofrock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers of the gate were on thewatch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, andthe gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knewno reason for it.
'But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of Saruman andthere he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on hisfinger.
` "So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in his eyesthere seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart.
` "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have come for your aid, Saruman theWhite." And that title seemed to anger him.
' "Have you indeed, Gandalf the _Grey_! " he scoffed. "For aid? It hasseldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one so cunning andso wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning himself in every business,
whether it belongs to him or not."
'I looked at him and wondered. "But if I am not deceived," said I,
"things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength."
' "That may be so," he said, "but the thought is late in coming to you.
How long. I wonder, have you concealed from me, the head of the Council, amatter of greatest import? What brings you now from your lurking-place in theShire? "
' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed theRiver. So Radagast said to me."
` "Radagast the Brown! " laughed Saruman, and he no longer concealed hisscorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! Yethe had just the wit to play the part that I set him. For you have come, andthat was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay, Gandalf theGrey, and rest from journeys. For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker,
Saruman of Many Colours! "
'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not

so, but were woven of all colours. and if he moved they shimmered and changed
hue so that the eye was bewildered.
' "I liked white better," I said.
' "White! " he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White cloth may bedyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken."
' "In which case it is no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks athing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom."
' "You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you take forfriends," said he. "I have not brought you hither to be instructed by you, butto give you a choice."
'He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making aspeech long rehearsed. "The Elder Days are gone. The Middle Days are passing.
The Younger Days are beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but our time isat hand: the world of Men, which we must rule. But we must have power, powerto order all things as we will, for that good which only the Wise can see.
' "And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper! " he said, coming nearand speaking now in a softer voice. "I said we, for we it may be, if you willjoin with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old allies and policieswill not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying N~menor.
This then is one choice before you. before us. We may join with that Power. Itwould be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; andthere will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the Power grows, itsproved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may withpatience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. We can bide ourtime, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done bythe way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order;
all the things that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish, hinderedrather than helped by our weak or idle friends. There need not be, there wouldnot be, any real change in our designs, only in our means."
' "Saruman," I said, "I have heard speeches of this kind before, but onlyin the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I cannotthink that you brought me so far only to weary my ears."
'He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. "Well, I seethat this wise course does not commend itself to you," he said. "Not yet? Notif some better way can be contrived? "
`He came and laid his long hand on my arm. "And why not, Gandalf? " hewhispered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could command that, then the Powerwould pass to us. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have manyeyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this precious thing nowlies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what is yourbusiness there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal shone
suddenly in his eyes.
' "Saruman," I said, standing away from him, "only one hand at a time canwield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we! But Iwould not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now that Ilearn your mind. You were head of the Council, but you have unmasked yourselfat last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to submit to Sauron, or to yourself.
I will take neither. Have you others to offer? "
'He was cold now and perilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not expect you toshow wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding mewillingly. and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice isto stay here, until the end."
' "Until what end? "
' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find means topersuade you. Or until it is found in your despite, and the Ruler has time toturn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a fitting reward for the hindranceand insolence of Gandalf the Grey."
' "That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters," said I. Helaughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it.
`They took me and they set me alone on the pinnacle of Orthanc, in the

place where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars. There is no descentsave by a narrow stair of many thousand steps, and the valley below seems faraway. I looked on it and saw that, whereas it had once been green and fair, itwas now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in Isengard,
for Saruman was mustering a great force on his own account, in rivalry ofSauron and not in his service yet. Over all his works a dark smoke hung andwrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on an island in theclouds; and I had no chance of escape, and my days were bitter. I was piercedwith cold, and I had but little room in which to pace to and fro, brooding onthe coming of the Riders to the North.
`That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from the words ofSaruman which might be lies. Long ere I came to Isengard I had heard tidingsby the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for myfriends in the Shire; but still I had some hope. I hoped that Frodo had setforth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendellbefore the deadly pursuit began. And both my fear and my hope proved ill-
founded. For my hope was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was foundedon the cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls to answer;
and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in the circle ofIsengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the hunters beforewhom all have fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far away.'
`I saw you!' cried Frodo. `You were walking backwards and forwards. Themoon shone in your hair.'
Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. 'It was only a dream' saidFrodo, `but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It camesome time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.'
`Then it was late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in anevil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in suchneed, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught like a flyin a spider's treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle spiders may leave aweak thread.
`At first I feared, as Saruman no doubt intended, that Radagast had alsofallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in his voice or in his eyeat our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I shouldhave gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed his mind anddeceived his messenger. It would have been useless in any case to try and winover the honest Radagast to treachery. He sought me in good faith, and sopersuaded me.
`That was the undoing of Saruman's plot. For Radagast knew no reason whyhe should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where he hadmany friends of old. And the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, andthey saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; andthe Nine Riders going hither and thither in the lands; and they heard news ofthe escape of Gollum. And they sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me.
`So it was that when summer waned, there came a night of moon, andGwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great Eagles, came unlooked-for toOrthanc; and he found me standing on the pinnacle. Then I spoke to him and hebore me away, before Saruman was aware. I was far from Isengard, ere thewolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me.
` "How far can you bear me? " I said to Gwaihir.
` "Many leagues," said he, "but not to the ends of the earth. I was sentto bear tidings not burdens."
` "Then I must have a steed on land," I said, "and a steed surpassinglyswift, for I have never had such need of haste before."
` "Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan sits in hishalls," he said; "for that is not very far off." And I was glad, for in theRiddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and there are nohorses like those that are bred in that great vale between the Misty Mountainsand the White.
` "Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? " I said to

Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith.
` "They pay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly toMordor, or so it is said; but they are not yet under the yoke. But if Sarumanhas become evil, as you say, then their doom cannot be long delayed."
`He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now I have lengthenedmy tale over long. The rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found evil alreadyat work: the lies of Saruman; and the king of the land would not listen to mywarnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose one much to myliking. but little to his. I took the best horse in his land, and I have neverseen the like of him.'
'Then he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and it grieves memore than many tidings that might seem worse to learn that Sauron levies suchtribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.'
`Nor is it now, I will swear,' said Boromir. `It is a lie that comes fromthe Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan; true and valiant, our allies, dwellingstill in the lands that we gave them long ago.'
`The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,' answered Aragorn. 'Sarumanhas fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find there, ifever you return?'
`Not this at least.' said Boromir, 'that they will buy their lives withhorses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without reason, forthe horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from theShadow. and their race, as that of their masters, is descended from the freedays of old.'
'True indeed!' said Gandalf. `And there is one among them that might havebeen foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of the Nine cannot viewith him; tireless, swift as the flowing wind. Shadowfax they called him. Byday his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, and hepasses unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had any man mounted him,
but I took him and I tamed him, and so speedily he bore me that I reached theShire when Frodo was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out from Rohan onlywhen he set out from Hobbiton.
'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings ofthe Riders, and though I gained on them day by day, they were ever before me.
They had divided their forces, I learned: some remained on the easternborders, not far from the Greenway. and some invaded the Shire from the south.
I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had words with old Gamgee. Manywords and few to the point. He had much to say about the shortcomings of thenew owners of Bag End.
` "I can't abide changes," said he, "not at my time of life, and least ofall changes for the worst." "Changes for the worst," he repeated many times.
' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hope you do not live tosee it." But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbitonless than a week before, and that a black horseman had come to the Hill thesame evening. Then I rode on in fear. I came to Buckland and found it inuproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I cameto the house at Crickhollow, and it was broken open and empty; but on thethreshold there lay a cloak that had been Frodo's. Then for a while hope leftme, and I did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; but Irode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went many ways,
and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me that one or two had ridden towards
Bree; and that way I went, for I thought of words that might be said to theinnkeeper.
' "Butterbur they call him," thought I. "If this delay was his fault, Iwill melt all the butter in him. I will roast the old fool over a slow fire."
He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down flat and began tomelt on the spot.'
`What did you do to him?' cried Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very kind

to us and did all that he could.'
Gandalf laughed. 'Don't be afraid!' he said. `I did not bite, and Ibarked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of him, whenhe stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How it happened I couldnot then guess, but I learned that you had been in Bree the night before, andhad gone off that morning with Strider.
` "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy.
` "Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir," said Butterbur, mistaking me. "He gotat them, in spite of all that I could do, and they took up with him. Theybehaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say."
` "Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman! " said I. "It's thebest news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at the least.
May your beer be laid under an enchantment of surpassing excellence for sevenyears! " said I. "Now I can take a night's rest, the first since I haveforgotten when."
`So I stayed there that night, wondering much what had become of theRiders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed. But inthe night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw downthe gates and passed through Bree like a howling wind; and the Bree-folk arestill shivering and expecting the end of the world. I got up before dawn andwent after them.
'I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what happened.
Their Captain remained in secret away south of Bree, while two rode aheadthrough the village, and four more invaded the Shire. But when these werefoiled in Bree and at Crickhollow, they returned to their Captain withtidings, and so left the Road unguarded for a while, except by their spies.
The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he himselfwith the rest rode along the Road in great wrath.
'I galloped to Weathertop like a gale, and I reached it before sundown onmy second day from Bree-and they were there before me. They drew away from me,
for they felt the coming of my anger and they dared not face it while the Sunwas in the sky. But they closed round at night, and I was besieged on thehill-top, in the old ring of Amon S.l. I was hard put to it indeed: such lightand flame cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the war-beacons of old.
`At sunrise I escaped and fled towards the north. I could not hope to domore. It was impossible to find you, Frodo, in the wilderness, and it wouldhave been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. So I had to trust toAragorn. But I hoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach Rivendell aheadof you and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me, but they turnedback after a while and made for the Ford, it seems. That helped a little, forthere were only five, not nine, when your camp was attacked.
'I reached here at last by a long hard road, up the Hoarwell and throughthe Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly fourteen days fromWeathertop, for I could not ride among the rocks of the troll-fells, andShadowfax departed. I sent him back to his master; but a great friendship hasgrown between us, and if I have need he will come at my call. But so it wasthat I came to Rivendell only three days before the Ring, and news of itsperil had already been brought here-which proved well indeed.
`And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the othersforgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened before, thatGandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised. An account to the Ring-
bearer of so strange an event was required, I think.
'Well, the Tale is now told, from first to last. Here we all are, andhere is the Ring. But we have not yet come any nearer to our purpose. Whatshall we do with it?'
There was silence. At last Elrond spoke again.

`This is grievous news concerning Saruman,' he said; `for we trusted himand he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply thearts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls and betrayals, alas,
have happened before. Of the tales that we have heard this day the tale ofFrodo was most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo here; andit seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone and singular as I had thoughthim. The world has changed much since I last was on the westward roads.
`The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the Old Forest manytales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern
march. Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what is nowthe Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, andmany things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeedthis is still the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even thenwas older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar we called
him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he has since been given byother folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald by Northern Men, and other namesbeside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned him to ourCouncil.'
`He would not have come,' said Gandalf.
`Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?' askedErestor. `It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.'
`No, I should not put it so,' said Gandalf. `Say rather that the Ring hasno power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot alter the Ring itself,
nor break its power over others. And now he is withdrawn into a little land,
within bounds that he has set, though none can see them, waiting perhaps for achange of days, and he will not step beyond them.'
`But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,' said Erestor.
`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?'
`No,' said Gandalf, `not willingly. He might do so, if all the free folkof the world begged him, but he would not understand the need. And if he weregiven the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely throw it away. Suchthings have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe guardian; and thatalone is answer enough.'
`But in any case,' said Glorfindel, `to send the Ring to him would onlypostpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take it back tohim, unguessed, unmarked by any spy. And even if we could, soon or late theLord of the Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his powertowards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. I thinkthat in the end, if all else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he wasFirst; and then Night will come.'
`I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; `but Glorfindel, Ithink, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless such power isin the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can torture and destroy thevery hills. What power still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, or withCirdan at the Havens, or in L车rien. But have they the strength, have we herethe strength to withstand the Enemy, the coming of Sauron at the last, whenall else is overthrown?'
`I have not the strength,' said Elrond; `neither have they.'
`Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength' saidGlorfindel, `two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it over theSea, or to destroy it.'
`But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craftthat we here possess,' said Elrond. `And they who dwell beyond the Sea wouldnot receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us whostill dwell here to deal with it.'
'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make thelies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the Council his
feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring was not lost forever, but wished us to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself. Yetoft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.'

`Not safe for ever,' said Gandalf. `There are many things in the deepwaters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our part here to takethought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or for a passing age ofthe world. We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not hopeto make one.'
'And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,' said Galdor. 'Ifthe return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then flight to the S谷a is nowfraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us totake the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The Ninehave been unhorsed indeed but that is but a respite, ere they find new steedsand swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands now between him and amarch in power along the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailing theWhite Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no escape from thelengthening shadows of Middle-earth.'
'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, yousay. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength is still verystrong.'
'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,' said Galdor.
'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.'
'Then,' said Erestor, `there are but two courses, as Glorfindel alreadyhas declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But both are beyondour power. Who will read this riddle for us?'
'None here can do so,' said Elrond gravely. `At least none can foretellwhat will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me nowclear which is the road that we must take. The westward road seems easiest.
Therefore it must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves have
fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen.
There lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into peril-to Mordor. We must sendthe Ring to the Fire.'
Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking out upon asunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness inhis heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He was fingering hisgreat horn and frowning. At length he spoke.
'I do not understand all this,' he said. `Saruman is a traitor, but didhe not have a glimpse of wisdom? Why do you speak ever of hiding anddestroying? Why should we not think that the Great Ring has come into ourhands to serve us in the very hour of need? Wielding it the Free Lords of theFree may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem.
'The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit; but they maybe beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the Ringbe your weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth tovictory!'
'Alas, no,' said Elrond. 'We cannot use the Ruling Ring. That we now knowtoo well. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone, and is altogetherevil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone to wield at will, saveonly those who have already a great power of their own. But for them it holdsan even deadlier peril. The very desire of it corrupts the heart. ConsiderSaruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow the Lord ofMordor, using his own arts, he would then set himself on Sauron's throne, andyet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another reason why the Ringshould be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it will be a danger even tothe Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so. I fearto take the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring to wield it.'
`Nor I,' said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head. `So be it,' hesaid. `Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have. And at theleast, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap theSword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide 每 if the hand that wields it has

inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.'
`Who can tell?' said Aragorn. `But we will put it to the test one day.'
`May the day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though I do notask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others fought alsowith all the means that they have.'
`Then be comforted,' said Elrond. `For there are other powers and realmsthat you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin the Great flows pastmany shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.'
'Still it might be well for all,' said Gl车in the Dwarf, 'if all thesestrengths were joined, and the powers of each were used in league. Other ringsthere may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our need. The Seven arelost to us 每 if Balin has not found the ring of Thr车r which was the last;
naught has been heard of it since Thr车r perished in Moria. Indeed I may nowreveal that it was partly in hope to find that ring that Balin went away.'
`Balin will find no ring in Moria,' said Gandalf. `Thr车r gave it toThr芍in his son, but not Thr芍in to Thorin. It was taken with torment fromThr芍in in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.'
'Ah, alas!' cried Gl车in. 'When will the day come of our revenge? Butstill there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mightyRings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made bythe Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they notsay?'
The Elves returned no answer. `Did you not hear me, Gl车in?' said Elrond.
`The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But of them itis not permitted to speak. So much only in this hour of doubt I may now say.
They are not idle. But they were not made as weapons of war or conquest: thatis not their power. Those who made them did not desire strength or dominationor hoarded wealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve allthings unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earth have in some measuregained, though with sorrow. But all that has been wrought by those who wieldthe Three will turn to their undoing, and their minds and hearts will becomerevealed to Sauron, if he regains the One. It would be better if the Three hadnever been. That is his purpose.'
`But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed as youcounsel?' asked Gl车in.
'We know not for certain,' answered Elrond sadly. `Some hope that theThree Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then become free, and theirrulers might heal the hurts of the world that he has wrought. But maybe whenthe One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fade and beforgotten. That is my belief.'
`Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion betaken away for ever.'
'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor,
`and yet we come no nearer. What strength have we for the finding of the Firein which it was made? That is the path of despair. Of folly I would say, ifthe long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.'
'Despair, or folly?' said Gandalf. `It is not despair, for despair isonly for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not. It is wisdom torecognize necessity, when all other courses have been weighed, though as follyit may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our cloak,
a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs allthings to a nicety in the scales of his malice. But the only measure that heknows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into his heartthe thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring wemay seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of reckoning.'
'At least for a while,' said Elrond. `The road must be trod, but it willbe very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far upon it. Thisquest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. Yet suchis oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small hands do

them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.'
'Very well, very well, Master Elrond!' said Bilbo suddenly. 'Say no more!
It is plain enough what you are pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit startedthis affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was verycomfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want to know, I am justwriting an ending for it. I had thought of putting: _and he lived happily everafterwards to the end of his days_. It is a good ending, and none the worsefor having been used before. Now I shall have to alter that: it does not looklike coming true; and anyway there will evidently have to be several morechapters, if I live to write them. It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I tostart?
' Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died on his lipswhen he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave respect.
Only Gl车in smiled, but his smile came from old memories.
`Of course, my dear Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `If you had really started thisaffair, you might be expected to finish it. But you know well enough now that_starting_ is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part is playedin great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was meant, andwe do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer. But one beyondyour strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has passed on. Ifyou need my advice any longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless asa recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! There is stillhope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when they come back.'
Bilbo laughed. `I have never known you give me pleasant advice before.'
he said. `As all your unpleasant advice has been good, I wonder if this adviceis not bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength or luck left to dealwith the Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do you mean by_they_?'
`The messengers who are sent with the Ring.'
`Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what this Council hasto decide, and all that it has to decide. Elves may thrive on speech alone,
and Dwarves endure great weariness; but I am only an old hobbit, and I miss mymeal at noon. Can't you think of some names now? Or put it off till afterdinner?'
No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced atall the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the Council sat withdowncast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he wasawaiting the pronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen and vainlyhoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelming longing to rest andremain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all his heart. At lastwith an effort he spoke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if some otherwill was using his small voice.
`I will take the Ring,' he said, `though I do not know the way.'
Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heartpierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. `If I understand aright all thatI have heard,' he said, `I think that this task is appointed for you, Frodo;
and that if you do not find a way, no one will. This is the hour of the Shire-
folk, when they arise from their quiet fields to shake the towers and counselsof the Great. Who of all the Wise could have foreseen it? Or, if they arewise, why should they expect to know it, until the hour has struck?
`But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it on another. Ido not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I will say that your choiceis right; and though all the mighty elf-friends of old, Hador, and H~rin, andT~rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat should be among

them.'
`But you won't send him off alone surely, Master?' cried Sam, unable tocontain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had beenquietly sitting on the floor.
`No indeed!' said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. `You at leastshall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from him, even whenhe is summoned to a secret council and you are not.'
Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. `A nice pickle we have landedourselves in, Mr. Frodo!' he said, shaking his head.
_Chapter 3_
The Ring Goes South
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room.
Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into theCouncil, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion.
`It's most unfair,' said Pippin. `Instead of throwing him out, andclapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!'
`Rewards!' said Frodo. 'I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You arenot thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this hopeless journey, areward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could rest here, along while, perhaps for good.'
'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envyingSam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us tobe left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and beenthrough some stiff times. We want to go on.'
`That's what I meant,' said Pippin. `We hobbits ought to stick together,
and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There must be someone withintelligence in the party.'
'Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!' said Gandalf,
looking in through the window, which was near the ground. `But you are allworrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.'
`Nothing decided!' cried Pippin. 'Then what were you all doing? You wereshut up for hours.'
"Talking,' said Bilbo. `There was a deal of talk, and everyone had aneye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas's bit of news about Gollumcaught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.'
`You were wrong,' said Gandalf. 'You were inattentive. I had alreadyheard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, asyou put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was notsurprised.'
`Well, anyway,' said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poorFrodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I waslet off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when thereports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?'
'Yes,' said the wizard. `Some of the scouts have been sent out already.
More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they will get in touchwith the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And Aragorn hasgone with Elrond's sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for manylong leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will probablymake quite a long stay here.'
'Ah!' said Sam gloomily. 'We'll just wait long enough for winter tocome.'
'That can't be helped,' said Bilbo. 'It's your fault partly, Frodo mylad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it, Ican't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B.sinto Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can'tgo till the reports come back.

When winter first begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when pools are black and trees are bare,
'tis evil in the Wild to fare.
But that I am afraid will be just your luck.'
'I am afraid it will,' said Gandalf. 'We can't start until we have foundout about the Riders.'
`I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry.
'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. `The power oftheir master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hope that they wereall unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but we mustfind out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your troubles,
Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper thisin your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party. Hewas right. I think I shall come with you.'
So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left thewindow-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. 'Ionly said _I think I shall come_. Do not count on anything yet. In this matterElrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, Iwant to see Elrond. I must be off.'
`How long do you think I shall have here?' said Frodo to Bilbo whenGandalf had gone.
`Oh, I don't know. I can't count days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'Butquite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helpingme with my book, and making a start on the next? Have you thought of anending?'
'Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,' said Frodo.
'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. `Books ought to have good endings. Howwould this do: _and they all settled down and lived together happily everafter_?'
`It will do well, if it ever comes to that,' said Frodo.
'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.'
For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journeyand of the perils that lay ahead; but such was the virtue of the land ofRivendell that soon all fear and anxiety was lifted from their minds. Thefuture, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have any power over thepresent. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were content with eachgood day as it came, taking pleasure in every meal, and in every word andsong.
So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright and fair, andeach evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly thegolden light faded to pale silver, and the lingering leaves fell from thenaked trees. A wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the east.
The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the night sky, and put to flight all thelesser stars. But low in the South one star shone red. Every night, as theMoon waned again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from hiswindow, deep in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared above thetrees on the brink of the valley.
The hobbits had been nearly two months in the House of Elrond, andNovember had gone by with the last shreds of autumn, and December was passing,
when the scouts began to return. Some had gone north beyond the springs of theHoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west, and with the help ofAragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyflood, as faras Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined town. Manyhad gone east and south; and some of these had crossed the Mountains andentered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the pass at the source of theGladden River, and had come down into Wilderland and over the Gladden Fieldsand so at length had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel. Radagastwas not there; and they had returned over the high pass that was called the

Dimrill Stair. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and Elrohir, were the last toreturn; they had made a great journey, passing down the Silverlode into astrange country, but of their errand they would not speak to any save toElrond.
In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings of theRiders or other servants of the Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the MistyMountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing had been seen or heard ofGollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again farup the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drownedin the flooded Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discoveredthe bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered. Ofthe Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was their presenceto be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.
'Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,' said Gandalf. 'It isrash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hope now that the Ringwraithswere scattered, and have been obliged to return as best they could to theirMaster in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
`If that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the huntagain. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journeyall the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick up our trail. Andif we are careful that will be hard to find. But we must delay no longer.'
Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo. 'The timehas come,' he said. `If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon. But those whogo with it must not count on their errand being aided by war or force. Theymust pass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you still hold to yourword, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?'
'I do,' said Frodo. `I will go with Sam.'
`Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. `I canforesee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved I do notknow. The Shadow has crept now to the feet of the Mountains, and draws nigheven to the borders of Greyflood; and under the Shadow all is dark to me. Youwill meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may find friendsupon your way when you least look for it. I will send out messages, such as Ican contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so perilous are thelands now become that some may well miscarry, or come no quicker than youyourself.
`And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as they will orfortune allows. The number must be few, since your hope is in speed andsecrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armour of the Elder Days, it would availlittle, save to arouse the power of Mordor.
`The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers shall be setagainst the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your faithful servant,
Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and maybe the end of hislabours.
`For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of the World:
Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and Gimli son ofGl车in for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least to the passes of theMountains, and maybe beyond. For men you shall have Aragorn son of Arathorn,
for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.'
`Strider!' said Frodo.
'Yes,' he said with a smile. `I ask leave once again to be yourcompanion, Frodo.'
`I would have begged you to come,' said Frodo, 'only I thought you weregoing to Minas Tirith with Boromir.'
`I am,' said Aragorn. `And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforgedere I set out to war. But your road and our road lie together for manyhundreds of miles. Therefore Boromir will also be in the Company. He is avaliant man.'
'There remain two more to be found,' said Elrond. "These I will consider.
Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.'

`But that will leave no place for us!' cried Pippin in dismay. `We don'twant to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.'
`That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what liesahead,' said Elrond.
`Neither does Frodo,' said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting Pippin. 'Nordo any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits understood thedanger, they would not dare to go. But they would still wish to go, or wishthat they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in thismatter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship than to greatwisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord, such as Glorfindel, he could notstorm the Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is inhim.'
`You speak gravely,' said Elrond, `but I am in doubt. The Shire, Iforebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought to send backthere as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of theircountry, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that theyounger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My heart is against hisgoing.'
`Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me hometied in a sack,' said Pippin. `For otherwise I shall follow the Company.'
`Let it be so then. You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now thetale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.'
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its bladewas traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent Moon and the rayedSun, and about them was written many runes; for Aragorn son of Arathorn wasgoing to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was that sword when itwas made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it, and the light ofthe moon shone cold, and its edge was hard and keen. And Aragorn gave it a newname and called it And~ril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road and theperils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps andbooks of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with them;
but he was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent as much time as hecould with Bilbo.
In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall ofFire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren andL~thien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry andPippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo in hisown small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from his book (which stillseemed very incomplete). or scraps of his verses, or would take notes ofFrodo's adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and the oldhobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted the lid andfumbled inside.
'Here is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it tokeep it safe but I've forgotten to ask if the smiths could mend it. No timenow.. So I thought, perhaps, you would care to have this, don't you know?'
He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.
Then he drew it, and its polished and well-tended blade glittered suddenly,
cold and bright. 'This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effortdeep into a wooden beam. `Take it, if you like. I shan't want it again, Iexpect.'
Frodo accepted it gratefully.
'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed tobe rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth, and heldup a small shirt of mail. It was close-woven of many rings, as supple almostas linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit silver,
and was studded with white gems. With it was a belt of pearl and crystal.
'It's a pretty thing, isn't it?' said Bilbo, moving it in the light. `Anduseful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. I got it back from Michel

Delving before I started, and packed it with my luggage: I brought all themementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring. But I did not expect touse this, and I don't need it now, except to look at sometimes. You hardlyfeel any weight when you put it on.'
`I should look 每 well, I don't think I should look right in it,' saidFrodo.
`Just what I said myself,' said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. Youcan wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share this secret withme. Don't tell anybody else! But I should feel happier if I knew you werewearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the BlackRiders,' he ended in a low voice.
`Very well, I will take it,' said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, andfastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top hisold weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.
'Just a plain hobbit you look,' said Bilbo. 'But there is more about younow than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and lookedout of the window, trying to hum a tune.
'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our pastkindnesses,' said Frodo.
'Don't try!' said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him on theback. `Ow!' he cried. `You are too hard now to slap! But there you are:
Hobbits must stick together, and especially Bagginses. All I ask in return is:
take as much care of yourself as you can. and bring back all the news you can,
and any old songs and tales you can come by. I'll do my best to finish my bookbefore you return. I should like to write the second book, if I am spared.' Hebroke off and turned to the window again, singing softly.
I sit beside the fire and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-flowers and butterflies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the fire and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.
I sit beside the fire and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East Wind wasstreaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething in the darkpines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead, dark and low. As the

cheerless shadows of the early evening began to fall the Company made ready toset out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond counselled them to journeyunder cover of night as often as they could, until they were far fromRivendell.
`You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I donot doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached him,
and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing will beabroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky above you must beware as you goon your way.'
The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was in secrecy not inbattle. Aragorn had And~ril but no other weapon, and he went forth clad onlyin rusty green and brown. as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a longsword, in fashion like And~ril but of less lineage and he bore also a shieldand his war-horn.
'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,' he said, `andthen let all the foes of Gondor flee!' Putting it to his lips he blew a blast,
and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice inRivendell sprang to their feet.
Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir, said Elrond. 'untilyou stand once more on the borders of your land, and dire need is on you.'
`Maybe,' said Boromir. 'But always I have let my horn cry at settingforth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forthas a thief in the night.'
Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, fordwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed axe. Legolashad a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white knife. The youngerhobbits wore the swords that they had taken from the barrow; but Frodo tookonly Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden. Gandalf borehis staff, but girt at his side was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate ofOrcrist that lay now upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they hadjackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes and blankets andother needs were laden on a pony, none other than the poor beast that they hadbrought from Bree.
?he stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on him: he wasglossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was Sam who had insisted onchoosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine, if he did notcome.
`That animal can nearly talk,' he said, `and would talk, if he stayedhere much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it: ifyou don't let me go with you, Sam, I'll follow on my own.' So Bill was goingas the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that did notseem depressed.
Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, and theywere only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. Agleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing inmany windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the doorstep besideFrodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fullywhat this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey shapes in thedarkness.
Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring moodily intothe gloom where the river roared stonily below; his desire for adventure wasat its lowest ebb.
`Bill, my lad,' he said, `you oughtn't to have took up with us. You couldhave stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.' Bill swishedhis tail and said nothing.
Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in his mindall the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had forgottenanything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of saltthat he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply of pipe-weed

(but not near enough, I'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose: linen;
various small belongings of his master's that Frodo had forgotten and Sam hadstowed to bring them out in triumph when they were called for. He went throughthem all.
'Rope!' he muttered. `No rope! And only last night you said to yourself:
"Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got it:" Well,
I'll want it. I can't get it now.'
At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the Company tohim. 'This is my last word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer issetting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid:
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemynor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the Council,
and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free companions, tohelp him on his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into otherpaths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be towithdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you will. Foryou do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee whateach may meet upon the road.'
`Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli.
'Maybe,' said Elrond, `but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who hasnot seen the nightfall.'
'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,' said Gimli.
`Or break it,' said Elrond. `Look not too far ahead! But go now with goodhearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free Folk gowith you. May the stars shine upon your faces!'
'Good . . . good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 'I don'tsuppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect afull account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!'
Many others of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched themgo, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was no laughter, and no songor music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths that ledout of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high moorwhere the wind hissed through the heather. Then with one glance at the LastHomely House twinkling below them they strode away far into the night.
At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went onby narrow paths among the folded lands. Their purpose was to hold this coursewest of the Mountains for many miles and days. The country was much rougherand more barren than in the green vale of the Great River in Wilderland on theother side of the range, and their going would be slow; but they hoped in thisway to escape the notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hithertoseldom been seen in this empty country, and the paths were little known exceptto the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this landeven in the dark. The others were in file behind, and Legolas whose eyes werekeen was the rearguard. The first part of their journey was hard and dreary,
and Frodo remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless days an icyblast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed able to keepout its searching fingers. Though the Company was well clad, they seldom feltwarm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the middle of theday, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the tangled thorn-bushes thatgrew in thickets in many places. In the late afternoon they were roused by thewatch, and took their chief meal: cold and cheerless as a rule, for they couldseldom risk the lighting of a fire. In the evening they went on again, alwaysas nearly southward as they could find a way.
At first it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and stumbleduntil they were weary, they were creeping forward like snails, and gettingnowhere. Each day the land looked much the same as it had the day before. Yet

steadily the mountains were drawing nearer. South of Rivendell they rose everhigher, and bent westwards; and about the feet of the main range there wastumbled an ever wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys filled withturbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often only to theedge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The windsuddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The swift-flowing cloudslifted and melted away, and the sun came out, pale and bright. There came acold clear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellersreached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunksseemed to have been built out of the very stone of the hills. Their darkleaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains thatseemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the leftof this high range rose three peaks; the tallest and nearest stood up like atooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still largelyin the shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed red.
Gandalf stood at Frodo's side and looked out under his hand. `We have
done well,' he said. `We have reached the borders of the country that Men callHollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when Eregion was its name.
Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many long milesfurther our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be milder now, butperhaps all the more dangerous.'
`Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,' said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.
'But the mountains are ahead of us,' said Pippin. `We must have turnedeastwards in the night.'
'No,' said Gandalf. 'But you see further ahead in the clear light. Beyondthose peaks the range bends round south-west. There are many maps in Elrond'shouse, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?'
`Yes I did, sometimes,' said Pippin, `but I don't remember them. Frodohas a better head for that sort of thing.'
`I need no map,' said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and was gazingout before him with a strange light in his deep eyes. `There is the land whereour fathers worked of old, and we have wrought the image of those mountainsinto many works of metal and of stone, and into many songs and tales. Theystand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shath.r.
`Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I knowthem and their names, for under them lies Khazad-d.m, the Dwarrowdelf, that isnow called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. Yonder standsBarazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine andCloudyhead: Celebdil the White, and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call Zirakzigil
and Bundushath.r.
`There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies the deep-
shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, whichthe Elves call Nanduhirion.'
`It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,' said Gandalf. `If weclimb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side ofCaradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of theDwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises inits icy springs.'
`Dark is the water of Kheled-zaram,' said Gimli, `and cold are thesprings of Kibil-nala. My heart trembles at the thought that I may see themsoon.'
`May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf l' said Gandalf. 'Butwhatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go downthe Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the Great River, and then -'
He paused.
'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry.

'To the end of the journey 每 in the end,' said Gandalf. 'We cannot looktoo far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I think wewill rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There is a wholesome airabout Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly forgets theElves, if once they dwelt there.'
'That is true,' said Legolas. `But the Elves of this land were of a racestrange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not nowremember them: Only I hear the stones lament them: _deep they delved us, fairthey wrought us, high they builded us; but they are gone_. They are gone. Theysought the Havens long ago.'
That morning they lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by great bushes ofholly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had been since they setout. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all thenight to sleep in, and they did not mean to go on again until the evening ofthe next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while he left theCompany and wandered on to the ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree,
looking out southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he waslistening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked down at theothers laughing and talking.
`What is the matter, Strider?' Merry called up. 'What are you lookingfor? Do you miss the East Wind?'
'No indeed,' he answered. `But I miss something. I have been in thecountry of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but many othercreatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now all things but youare silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles about us, and yourvoices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.'
Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. `But what do you guess is thereason?' he asked. `Is there more in it than surprise at seeing four hobbits,
not to mention the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen or heard?'
`I hope that is it,' answered Aragorn. `But I have a sense ofwatchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.'
"Then we must be more careful,' said Gandalf. 'If you bring a Ranger withyou, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the Ranger is Aragorn.
We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.'
It was Sam's turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joinedhim. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it. Thebreathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony's tailand the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam could hear
his own joints creaking, if he stirred. Dead silence was around him, and overall hung a clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. Away in the Southa dark patch appeared, and grew, and drove north like flying smoke in thewind.
`What's that, Strider? It don't look like a cloud,' said Sam in a whisperto Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the sky; but beforelong Sam could see for himself what was approaching. Flocks of birds, flyingat great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all the land as ifthey were searching for something; and they were steadily drawing nearer.
`Lie flat and still!' hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade ofa holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from themain host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought theywere a kind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense athrong that their shadow followed them darkly over the ground below, one harshcroak was heard.
Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west, and thesky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up and went and wakenedGandalf.
`Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land between theMountains and the Greyflood,' he said, `and they have passed over Hollin. They

are not natives here; they are _crebain_ out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do notknow what they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from whichthey are fleeing; but I think they are spying out the land. I have alsoglimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move againthis evening. Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.'
`And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,' said Gandalf; `and how we canget over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of thatwhen we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you areright.'
`Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low before the_crebain_ came,' said Aragorn. `It must be put out and not lit again.'
`Well if that isn't a plague and a nuisance!' said Pippin. The news: nofire, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke inthe late afternoon. 'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward to areal good meal tonight: something hot.'
`Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. `There may be manyunexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke incomfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: itwill get warmer as we get south.'
'Too warm, I shouldn't wonder,' muttered Sam to Frodo. 'But I'm beginningto think it's time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain and saw the end ofthe Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn, or whateverits name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair jaw-crackerdwarf-language must be!' Maps conveyed nothing to Sam's mind, and alldistances in these strange lands seemed so vast that he was quite out of hisreckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds passed overnow and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they disappeared southwards.
At dusk the Company set out, and turning now half east they steered theircourse towards Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly red in the lastlight of the vanished Sun. One by one white stars sprang forth as the skyfaded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo like theremains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and well planned, fromHollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at the full, rose over themountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were black.
Many of them looked to have been worked by hands, though now they lay tumbledand ruinous in a bleak, barren land.
It was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moonwas low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt a shadow passover the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and then flashed out again.
He shivered.
`Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was justahead.
`No, but I felt it, whatever it was,' he answered. `It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.'
`It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, `and not with the wind.'
Nothing further happened that night. The next morning dawned evenbrighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the wind wasturning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbingsteadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and themountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rosebefore them, a mighty peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer nakedsides, dull red as if stained with blood.
There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind had gonenow round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked back.
`Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to Aragorn. 'The heights awaynorth are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down their shoulders.

Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the Redhorn Gate. We may wellbe seen by watchers on that narrow path, and waylaid by some evil; but theweather may prove a more deadly enemy than any. What do you think of yourcourse now, Aragorn?'
Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and Aragorn werecontinuing some debate that had begun long before. He listened anxiously.
'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well,
Gandalf,' answered Aragorn. `And perils known and unknown will grow as we goon. But we must go on; and it is no good our delaying the passage of themountains. Further south there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap ofRohan. I do not trust that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows whichside now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?'
'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. `But there is another way, and not bythe pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.'
'But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others Ibeg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.'
'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf.
'Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest andsleep,' said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast,
Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Itssides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo watchedthem, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned to theCompany Gandalf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face theweather and the high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was theother dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fillAragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned.
`From signs that we have seen lately,' said Gandalf, 'I fear that theRedhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that iscoming up behind. Snow may come. We must go with all the speed that we can.
Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of thepass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leave as soon as you can getready.'
'I will add a word of advice, if I may,' said Boromir. 'I was born underthe shadow of the White Mountains and know something of journeys in the highplaces. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down on theother side. It will not help us to keep so secret that we are frozen to death.
When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes, each of usshould carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'
'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't you lad?' said Sam. The ponylooked at him mournfully.
'Very well,' said Gandalf. `But we must not use the wood 每 not unless itis a choice between fire and death.'
The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their waybecame steep and difficult. The twisting and climbing road had in many placesalmost disappeared, and was blocked with many fallen stones. The night grewdeadly dark under great clouds. A bitter wind swirled among the rocks. Bymidnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The narrow pathnow wound under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grimflanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right was a gulfof darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment at thetop. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dimwhite flakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, filling all theair, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf andAragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam just behind. 'Snow's all right on

a fine morning, but I like to be in bed while it's falling. I wish this lotwould go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.' Except on the highmoors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and wasregarded as a pleasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit (saveBilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when the white wolves invadedthe Shire over the frozen Brandywine.
Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was alreadyankle-deep about his boots.
"This is what I feared,' he said. `What do you say now, Aragorn?'
'That I feared it too,' Aragorn answered, `but less than other things. Iknew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save highup in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we are still far down, where thepaths are usually open all the winter.'
'I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,' said Boromir. "They sayin my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that standupon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.'
'His arm has grown long indeed,' said Gimli, `if he can draw snow downfrom the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.'
'His arm has grown long,' said Gandalf.
While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened untilit almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had not gone more than afurlong when the storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled and thesnow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to keepgoing. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind the taller folk,
but it was plain that they could not go much further, if the snow continued.
Frodo's feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, as stoutas any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.
The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreement withoutany words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in the darkness round them. Itmay have been only a trick of the wind in the cracks and gullies of the rockywall, but the sounds were those of shrill cries, and wild howls of laughter.
Stones began to fall from the mountain-side, whistling over their heads, orcrashing on the path beside them. Every now and again they heard a dullrumble, as a great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above.
`We cannot go further tonight,' said Boromir. `Let those call it the windwho will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are aimed at us.'
`I do call it the wind,' said Aragorn. `But that does not make what yousay untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that havelittle love for those that go on two legs, and yet are not in league withSauron, but have purposes of their own. Some have been in this world longerthan he.'
'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `longyears ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.'
`It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack;
said Gandalf.
'But what can we do?' cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on Merry andFrodo, and he was shivering.
`Either stop where we are, or go back,' said Gandalf. 'It is no goodgoing on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves thecliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard slope.
We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones 每 or anything else.'
`And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. `Wehave passed no place on the way up that offered more shelter than this cliff-
wall we are under now.'
`Shelter!' muttered Sam. `If this is shelter, then one wall and no roofmake a house.'
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as they could. Itfaced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little, so that they

hoped it would give them some protection from the northerly wind and from thefalling stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from every side, and thesnow flowed down in ever denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stoodpatiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened them a little;
but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks, and it went onmounting. If they had had no larger companions the hobbits would soon havebeen entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into awarm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes, and out of theshadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice speaking_. Idon't think much of your diary_, he said. _Snowstorms on January the twelfth:
there was no need to come back to report that!_
_But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo_, Frodo answered with an effort, whenhe felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir hadlifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
`This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,' said Boromir. `It isuseless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must do somethingto save ourselves.'
`Give them this,' said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out aleathern flask. `Just a mouthful each 每 for all of us. It is very precious. Itis _miruvor_, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting.
Pass it round!'
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquorhe felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left his limbs. Theothers also revived and found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow did notrelent. It whirled about them thicker than ever, and the wind blew louder.
'What do you say to fire?' asked Boromir suddenly. 'The choice seems nearnow between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from allunfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not help us.'
'You may make a fire, if you can,' answered Gandalf. 'If there are anywatchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.' Butthough they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice of Boromir, it passedthe skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid the
swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf himselftook a hand. Picking up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and then witha word of command_, naur an edraith ammen!_ he thrust the end of his staffinto the midst of it. At once a great spout of green and blue flame sprangout, and the wood flared and sputtered.
`If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,' he said.
'I have written _Gandalf is here_ in signs that all can read from Rivendell tothe mouths of Anduin.'
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes. Theirhearts were rejoiced to see the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily;
and though all round it the snow hissed, and pools of slush crept under theirfeet, they warmed their hands gladly at the blaze. There they stood, stoopingin a circle round the little dancing and blowing flames. A red light was ontheir tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on.
The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.'
`If any dawn can pierce these clouds,' said Gimli.
Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness. 'Thesnow is growing less,' he said, `and the wind is quieter.'
Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes still falling out of the dark to berevealed white for a moment in the light of the dying fire; but for a longtime he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly, as sleep wasbeginning to creep over him again, he was aware that the wind had indeedfallen, and the flakes were becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly a dim light

began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether.
As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world. Below theirrefuge were white humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath which the paththat they had trodden was altogether lost; but the heights above were hiddenin great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. `Caradhras has not forgiven us.' hesaid. `He has more snow yet to fling at us, if we go on. The sooner we go backand down the better.'
To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difficult. It might wellprove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow laymany feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in places it had beenscooped and piled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff.
`If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a pathfor you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone of theCompany remained still light of heart.
`If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to saveus,' answered Gandalf. `But I must have something to work on. I cannot burnsnow.'
`Well,' said Boromir, `when heads are at a loss bodies must serve, as wesay in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See! Though all is nowsnow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about that shoulder of rock downyonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we could reachthat point, maybe it would prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlongoff, I guess.'
`Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little less inheight, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and Aragorn followedhim. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling heavily. In places the snowwas breast-high, and often Boromir seemed to bc swimming or burrowing with hisgreat arms rather than walking.
Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and then heturned to the others. `The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: leta ploughman plough, but choose an otter for swimming, and for running lightover grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.'
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if for thefirst time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but woreonly light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint in thesnow.
'Farewell!' he said to Gandalf. `I go to find the Sun!' Then swift as arunner over firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men,
with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into the distance, andvanished round the rocky turn.
The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragorndwindled into black specks in the whiteness. At length they too passed fromsight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snowcame curling down again.
An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at lastthey saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir and Aragorn reappearedround the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope.
`Well,' cried Legolas as he ran up, `I have not brought the Sun. She iswalking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on thisRedhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam ofgood hope for those who are doomed to go on feet. There is the greatest wind-
drift of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almostburied. They despaired, until I returned and told them that the drift waslittle wider than a wall. And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less,
while further down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit's
toes.'
`Ah, it is as I said,' growled Gimli. 'It was no ordinary storm. It is

the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and that driftwas laid to cut off our escape.'
'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you,'
said Boromir, who came up at that moment. `And doughty Men too, if I may sayit; though lesser men with spades might have served you better. Still, we havethrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be grateful whocannot run as light as Elves.'
`But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through thedrift?' said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
'Have hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strengthleft, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others no doubt willmake shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will beginwith you.'
He lifted up the hobbit. 'Cling to my back! I shall need my arms' he saidand strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin marvelled at hisstrength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with no other toolthan his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the trackfor those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went.
They came at length to the great drift. It was flung across the mountain-
path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as if shaped withknives, reared up more than twice the height of Boromir; but through themiddle a passage had been beaten, rising and falling like a bridge. On the farside Merry and Pippin were set down, and there they waited with Legolas forthe rest of the Company to arrive.
After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow but nowwell-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli perched among thebaggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; buthardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled downa fall of stones and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the Companyas they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again they sawthat the path was blocked behind them.
`Enough, enough!' cried Gimli. 'We are departing as quickly as we may!'
And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain seemed to be
expended, as if Caradhras was satisfied that the invaders had been beaten offand would not dare to return. The threat of snow lifted; the clouds began tobreak and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily moreshallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soonthey all stood once more on the flat shelf at the head of the steep slopewhere they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they looked backwestwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble of country that lay atthe foot of the mountain was the dell from which they had started to climb thepass.
Frodo's legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his headwas dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specksswam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In thedistance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots werecircling in the air.
`The birds again!' said Aragorn, pointing down.
'That cannot be helped now,' said Gandalf. `Whether they are good orevil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down at once. Not evenon the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!'
A cold wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on theRedhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the slope. Caradhras had defeatedthem.
_Chapter 4_
A Journey in the Dark

It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when theyhalted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were veiled indeepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more mouthfuleach of the miruvor of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called acouncil.
'We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,' he said. `The attack on theRedhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.'
`And then where are we to go? ' asked Frodo.
'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.
`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'
Pippin's face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return toRivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and Boromir made nosign. Frodo looked troubled.
`I wish I was back there,' he said. `But how can I return without shame 每
unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? '
`You are right, Frodo,' said Gandalf: `to go back is to admit defeat andface worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring must remain there:
we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell will bebesieged, and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. TheRingwraiths are deadly enemies, but they are only shadows yet of the power andterror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's handagain.'
'Then we must go on, if there is a way,' said Frodo with a sigh. Sam sankback into gloom.
`There is a way that we may attempt,' said Gandalf. `I thought from thebeginning, when first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But itis not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before.
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least beentried.'
`If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evilindeed,' said Merry. `But you had better tell us about it, and let us know theworst at once.'
'The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,' said Gandalf.
Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering fire was in his eyes. On all theothers a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it was a
legend of vague fear:
`The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will leadthrough Moria? ' said Aragorn darkly.
`It is a name of ill omen,' said Boromir. `Nor do I see the need to gothere. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until wecome to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly to my people, taking the roadthat I followed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and cross the Isen intoLangstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to thesea.'
'Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf.
'Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him I may have business ofmy own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that canby any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go withthe Bearer.
'As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might spend a yearin such a journey, and we should pass through many lands that are empty andharbourless. Yet they would not be safe. The watchful eyes both of Saruman andof the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, you were in theEnemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of smallconcern to him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you returnnow as a member of the Ring's Company, and you are in peril as long as youremain with us. The danger will increase with every league that we go southunder the naked sky.
`Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more

desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not soon vanish from sightfor a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go neitherover the mountains, nor round them, but under them. That is a road at any ratethat the Enemy will least expect us to take.'
`We do not know what he expects,' said Boromir. `He may watch all roads,
likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be to walk into a trap,
hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name ofMoria is black.'
`You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to thestronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf. `I alone of you have ever been in thedungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older and lesser dwelling in DolGuldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-d.r do not return. But I would notlead you into Moria if there were no hope of coming out again. If there areOrcs there, it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs of theMisty Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies. TheEagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there is a hopethat Moria is still free.
`There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some deephall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove,
one must tread the path that need chooses!'
'I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! ' said Gimli. 'I will go andlook on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there-if you can find the doorsthat are shut.'
'Good, Gimli! ' said Gandalf. `You encourage me. We will seek the hiddendoors together. And we will come through. In the ruins of the Dwarves, adwarf's head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yetit will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I sought there longfor Thr芍in son of Thr车r after he was lost. I passed through, and I came outagain alive! '
`I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though Ialso came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria asecond time.'
'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Pippin.
'Nor me,' muttered Sam.
`Of course not! ' said Gandalf. 'Who would? But the question is: who willfollow me, if I lead you there? '
'I will,' said Gimli eagerly.
'I will,' said Aragorn heavily. `You followed my lead almost to disasterin the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow your lead now 每 ifthis last warning does not move you. It is not of the Ring, nor of us othersthat I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to you: if you pass thedoors of Moria, beware! '
`I will _not_ go,' said Boromir; 'not unless the vote of the wholecompany is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The Ring-
bearer's voice surely should be heard? '
'I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.
The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. `I donot wish to go,' he said; `but neither do I wish to refuse the advice ofGandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it.
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this coldgloom. How the wind howls! '
At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind hissingamong the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round them inthe empty spaces of the night.
Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. 'How the wind howls! ' he cried. 'Itis howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of the Mountains! '
'Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. `It is as I said. Thehunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journeysouth by night with the wild wolves on his trail? '
'How far is Moria? ' asked Boromir.

`There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the crowflies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,' answered Gandalf grimly.
'Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,' saidBoromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.'
`True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. `But where thewarg howls, there also the orc prowls.'
`I wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Pippin to Sam. `I am nogood after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarerin me: these howls freeze my blood. I don't ever remember feeling sowretched.'
'My heart's right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But we aren'tetten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever may be instore for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolf's belly.'
For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of thesmall hill under which they had been sheltering. it was crowned with a knot ofold and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones. Inthe midst of this they lit a fire, for there was no hope that darkness andsilence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.
Round the fire they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed uneasily.
Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where he stood. The howling of thewolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and sometimes further off. Inthe dead of the night many shining eyes were seen peering over the brow of thehill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a gap in the circle agreat dark wolf-shape could be seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howlbroke from him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen,
Hound of Sauron! ' he cried. `Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foulskin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.'
The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At thatmoment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow. There was ahideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the ground; the elvish arrowhad pierced its throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished. Gandalfand Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs hadfled. All about them the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighingwind.
The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting. gleamingfitfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started from sleep.
Without warning a storm of howls broke out fierce and wild all about the camp.
A great host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking them fromevery side at once.
`Fling fuel on the fire!' cried Gandalf to the hobbits. `Draw yourblades, and stand back to back!'
In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many greyshapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed. Through thethroat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with a greatsweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood with hisstout legs apart, wielding his dwarf-axe. The bow of Legolas was singing.
In the wavering firelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up, agreat menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of stone set upona hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to meetthe wolves. They gave back before him. High in the air he tossed the blazingbrand. It flared with a sudden white radiance like lightning; and his voicerolled like thunder.
`_Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!_' he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into a leafand bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt from tree-top to tree-top. Thewhole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords and knives of thedefenders shone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the air asit flew, and plunged burning into the heart of a great wolf-chieftain. All theothers fled.

Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks; abitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from thehill, as the first light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their enemies wererouted and did not return.
`What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin? ' said Sam, she/thing his sword.
`Wolves won't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singedthe hair off my head!'
When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to befound, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead. No trace of thefight remained but the charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on thehill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left.
`It is as I feared,' said Gandalf. `These were no ordinary wolves huntingfor food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!'
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command ofsome power that had no longer any use for snow, since they had retreated fromthe pass, a power that wished now to have a clear light in which things thatmoved in the wild could be seen from far away. The wind had been turningthrough north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The cloudsvanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood uponthe hill-side, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the mountaintops.
`We must reach the doors before sunset,' said Gandalf, 'or I fear weshall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, forhere Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and onlyonce have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago.
`There it lies,' he said, pointing away south-eastwards to where themountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the distance
could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst, taller than therest, one great grey wall. `When we left the pass I led you southwards, andnot back to our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It is wellthat I did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and haste isneeded. Let us go! '
`I do not know which to hope,' said Boromir grimly: `that Gandalf willfind what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lostfor ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wallthe likeliest chance. Lead on!'
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard's side, so eager was he to come toMoria. Together they led the Company back towards the mountains. The only roadof old to Moria from the west had lain along the course of a stream, theSirannon, that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors hadstood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land had changed in recentyears; for he did not strike the stream where he looked to find it, only a fewmiles southwards from their start.
The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Company wandered andscrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere could they see any gleamof water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts sank.
They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the nightwould bring, if it caught them in that lost land, none of them cared to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to them. He wasstanding on a knoll and pointing to the right. Hurrying up they saw below thema deep and narrow channel. It was empty and silent, and hardly a trickle ofwater flowed among the brown and red-stained stones of its bed; but on thenear side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound its way amongthe ruined walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
'Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. `This is where the stream ran:
Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has happened to thewater, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy. Come! We must hurry on.
We are late.'
The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly along therough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and began

to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty meal they went on again. Beforethem the mountains frowned, but their path lay in a deep trough of land andthey could see only the higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks.
At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, which had beenveering southwards between the brink of the channel and a steep fall of theland to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding the corner they sawbefore them a low cliff, some five fathoms high, with a broken and jagged top.
Over it a trickling water dripped, through a wide cleft that seemed to havebeen carved out by a fall that had once been strong and full.
`Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. `But there is no mistakingthe place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember right,
there was a flight of steps cut in the rock at their side, but the main roadwound away left and climbed with several loops up to the level ground at thetop. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right up to the Wallsof Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it with the road beside it. Let usgo and see what things are like now! '
They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftlyup them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached the top they sawthat they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up ofthe Gate-stream was revealed. Behind them the sinking Sun filled the coolwestern sky with glimmering gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake.
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon hadbeen dammed and had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water werereared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: final andimpassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a fissure or crack could Frodosee in the frowning stone.
`There are the Walls of Moria,' said Gandalf, pointing across the water.
`And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end of theroad from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None of theCompany, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at the end of the day.
It has an unwholesome look.'
`We must find a way round the northern edge,' said Gimli. `The firstthing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path and see where thatwill lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could not get our baggage-pony upthis stair.'
`But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,' saidGandalf. `The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are placesnarrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.'
`Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. `I had not thought of that. And poor Sam! Iwonder what he will say? '
`I am sorry,' said Gandalf. `Poor Bill has been a useful companion and itgoes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter andbrought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had had myway. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.'
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the skyhigh above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed they could,
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it lookedto be no more than two or three furlongs at the widest point. How far itstretched away southward they could not see in the failing light; but itsnorthern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and betweenthe stony ridges that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a rimof open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to gobefore they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was makingfor; and then he had still to find the doors.
When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found a narrowcreek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant, thrust out like aslimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode forward undeterred, andfound that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at the edge. Behindhim they walked in file, threading their way with care, for under the weedypools were sliding and greasy stones, and footing was treacherous. Frodo

shuddered with disgust at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet.
As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground on thefar side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a fishhad disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly they sawripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great rings werewidening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bubblingnoise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the last gleams of the sunsetwere veiled in cloud.
Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed asquickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between the lake andthe cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards across, and encumberedwith fallen rock and stones; but they found a way, hugging the cliff, andkeeping as far from the dark water as they might. A mile southwards along theshore they came upon holly trees. Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in theshallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had oncelined the road across the drowned valley. But close under the cliff therestood, still strong and living, . two tall trees, larger than any trees ofholly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined. Their great roots spread from thewall to the water. Under the looming cliffs they had looked like mere bushes,
when seen far off from the top of the Stair; but now they towered overhead,
stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep night-shadows about their feet,
standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the road.
`Well, here we are at last! ' said Gandalf. 'Here the Elven-way fromHollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they plantedit here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was made chieflyfor their use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were happierdays, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of differentrace, even between Dwarves and Elves.'
'It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,' saidGimli.
'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas.
'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement now.
But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to help me.
I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find themthe better. Night is at hand! '
Turning to the others he said: 'While I am searching, will you each makeready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we must say farewell to our goodbeast of burden. You must lay aside much of the stuff that we brought againstbitter weather: you will not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we come throughand journey on down into the South. Instead each of us must take a share ofwhat the pony carried, especially the food and the water-skins.'
'But you can't leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place, Mr.
Gandalf! ' cried Sam, angry and distressed. `I won't have it, and that's flat.
After he has come so far and all! '
'I am sorry, Sam,' said the wizard. `But when the Door opens I do notthink you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long dark of Moria.
You will have to choose between Bill and your master.'
'He'd follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon's den, if I led him,' protested Sam.
`It'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these wolvesabout.'
'It will be short of murder, I hope,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand onthe pony's head, and spoke in a low voice. `Go with words of guard and guidingon you,' he said. `You are a wise beast, and have learned much in Rivendell.
Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in time toElrond's house, or wherever you wish to go.
`There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves andgetting home as we have.'
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming tounderstand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him, putting his nose toSam's ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all the

pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others sorted out the goods,
making a pile of all that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest.
When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared to have donenothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall of thecliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was wanderingabout, tapping the stone here and there with his axe. Legolas was pressedagainst the rock, as if listening.
'Well, here we are and all ready,' said Merry; `but where are the Doors?
I can't see any sign of them.'
'Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. `They areinvisible, and their own masters cannot find them or open them, if theirsecret is forgotten.'
'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' saidGandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round. `Unless things arealtogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.'
He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the treesthere was a smooth space, and over this he passed his hands to and fro,
muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
'Look!' he said. `Can you see anything now?'
The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they could seenothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where the wizard's handshad passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running in thestone. At first they were no more than pale gossamer-threads, so fine thatthey only twinkled fitfully where the Moon caught them, but steadily they grewbroader and clearer, until their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacingletters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were in placesblurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and a hammersurmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these again were two trees,
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth inthe middle of the door a single star with many rays.
`There are the emblems of Durin!' cried Gimli.
`And there is the Tree of the High Elves!' said Legolas.
`And the Star of the House of F.anor,' said Gandalf. `They are wrought of_ithildin_ that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and sleeps until it istouched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is longsince I heard them, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to mymind.'
'What does the writing say?' asked Frodo, who was trying to decipher theinscription on the arch. 'I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot readthese.'
`The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth in theElder Days,' answered Gandalf. 'But they do not say anything of importance tous. They say only: _The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, andenter_. And underneath small and faint is written: _I, Narvi, made them.
Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs._'
`What does it mean by _speak, friend, and enter_?' asked Merry.
'That is plain enough,' said Gimli. `If you are a friend, speak thepassword, and the doors will open, and you can enter.'
'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably governed by words. Somedwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular persons; andsome have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times andwords are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were notsecret. They usually stood open and doorwards sat here. But if they were shut,
any who knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At least so it isrecorded, is it not, Gimli? '
'It is,' said the dwarf. `But what the word was is not remembered. Narviand his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.'

'But do not _you_ know the word, Gandalf? ' asked Boromir in surprise.
`No! ' said the wizard.
The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf well, remainedsilent and unmoved.
'Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?' criedBoromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. `You told us that youhad once passed through the Mines. How could that be, if you did not know howto enter? '
`The answer to your first question, Boromir,' said the wizard, `is that Ido not know the word-yet. But we shall soon see. And,' he added, with a glintin his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what is the use of mydeeds when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do you doubtmy tale? Or have you no wits left? I did not enter this way. I came from theEast.
`If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From the outsidenothing will move them save the spell of command. They cannot be forcedinwards.'
`What are you going to do then? ' asked Pippin, undaunted by the wizard'sbristling brows.
`Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. `But ifthat does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace from foolishquestions, I will seek for the opening words.
`I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or Orcs thatwas ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember ten score of themwithout searching in my mind. But only a few trials, I think, will be needed;
and I shall not have to call on Gimli for words of the secret dwarf-tonguethat they teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, like the writing onthe arch: that seems certain.'
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff thesilver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank greystone did not stir.
Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied them.
Then he tried other spells. one after another, speaking now faster and louder,
now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech. Nothinghappened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were kindled,
the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke intones of command and rising wrath. _Edro, edro!_ he cried, and struck the rockwith his staff. _Open, open!_ he shouted, and followed it with the samecommand in every language that had ever been spoken in the West of Middle-
earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground, and sat down in silence.
At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears thehowling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his sideand whispered softly to him.
'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we shall needhim still, if the wolves do not find us. How I hate this foul pool! ' Hestooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant there was aswish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface out beyondwhere the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards the foot of thecliff.
'Why did you do that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. `I hate this place, too, andI am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind thedoors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! '

'l wish we could get away! ' said Merry.
'Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin.
Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed, either indespair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was heardagain. The ripples on the water grew and came closer; some were alreadylapping on the shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his feet.
He was laughing! `I have it! ' he cried. 'Of course, of course! Absurdlysimple, like most riddles when you see the answer.'
Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear voice:
_Mellon!_
The star shone out briefly and faded again. Then silently a great doorwaywas outlined, though not a crack or joint had been visible before. Slowly itdivided in the middle and swung outwards inch by inch, until both doors layback against the wall. Through the opening a shadowy stair could be seenclimbing steeply up; but beyond the lower steps the darkness was deeper thanthe night. The Company stared in wonder.
`I was wrong after all,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli too. Merry, of allpeople, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on the archwayall the time! The translation should have been: _Say "Friend" and enter._ Ihad only to speak the Elvish word for _friend_ and the doors opened. Quitesimple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days. Thosewere happier times. Now let us go!'
He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that momentseveral things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by the ankle, and hefell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned tail anddashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped after him, andthen hearing Frodo's cry he ran back again, weeping and cursing. The othersswung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host of snakeswere swimming up from the southern end.
Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was pale-greenand luminous and wet. Its fingered end had hold of Frodo's foot and wasdragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it with aknife.
The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help.
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was ahideous stench.
`Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick! ' shouted Gandalf leaping back.
Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to theground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up, andGandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed across thenarrow shore and fingered the cliff-wall and the doors. One came wrigglingover the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned and paused. Ifhe was considering what word would close the gate again from within, there wasno need. Many coiling arms seized the doors on either side, and with horriblestrength, swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed, and all lightwas lost. A noise of rending and crashing came dully through the ponderousstone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo's arm, collapsed on a step in the black darkness.
`Poor old Bill! ' he said in a choking voice. `Poor old Bill! Wolves andsnakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to choose, Mr. Frodo. Ihad to come with you.'
They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff againstthe doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but thedoors did not open. `Well, well! ' said the wizard. `The passage is blockedbehind us now and there is only one way out每on the other side of themountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and thetrees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the trees werebeautiful, and had stood so long.'

`I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my footfirst touched the water,' said Frodo. 'What was the thing, or were there manyof them? '
'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by onepurpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under themountains. There are older and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places ofthe world.' He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it was that dweltin the lake, it had seized on Frodo first among all the Company.
Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magnified thesound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: `In the deep places of theworld! And thither we are going against my wish. Who will lead us now in thisdeadly dark? '
'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff! '
As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staffaloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway wassound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad and shallow; and atthe top they found an arched passage with a level floor leading on into thedark.
`Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can't find a dining-room! ' said Frodo. He had begun to shake off theterror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps,
dim figures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf gave them each a thirdsip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
`It will not last much longer, I am afraid,' he said; 'but I think weneed it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck, we shallneed all that is left before we see the other side! Go carefully with thewater, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines, but they should notbe touched. We may not have a chance of filling our skins and bottles till wecome down into Dimrill Dale.'
'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo.
'I cannot say,' answered Gandalf. 'It depends on many chances. But goingstraight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or fourmarches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-door to East-
gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.'
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eagerto get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing, tired asthey were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf walked in frontas before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light ofwhich just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his swordGlamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light as heturned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he haddrawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or ofGlamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths inthe Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs were near athand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the young hobbits, andBoromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked Aragorn.
The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend. It wentsteadily down for a long while before it became level once again. The air grewhot and stifling, but it was not foul, and at times they felt currents ofcooler air upon their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings in the walls.
There were many of these. In the pale ray of the wizard's staff, Frodo caughtglimpses of stairs and arches and of other passages and tunnels, sloping up,
or running steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It wasbewildering beyond hope of remembering.
Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At least hewas not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere darkness in itself.
Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was doubtful;
but it was always Gandalf who had the final word. The Mines of Moria were vastand intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, Gl车in's son, dwarf of the

mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey longbefore were now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windingsof the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did not falter, as long asthere was a path that led towards his goal.
`Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than usual,
and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others were crowdedbehind, waiting anxiously. `Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many ajourney, if never on one so dark; and there are tales of Rivendell of greaterdeeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray-if there is anypath to find. He has led us in here against our fears, but he will lead us outagain, at whatever cost to himself. He is surer of finding the way home in ablind night than the cats of Queen Ber~thiel.'
It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had no fuelnor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at the doors manythings had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have cometo grief. There were not only many roads to choose from, there were also inmany places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside the path in which theirpassing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls and floor,
and every now and then a crack would open right before their feet. The widestwas more than seven feet across, and it was long before Pippin could summonenough courage to leap over the dreadful gap. The noise of churning water cameup from far below, as if some great mill-wheel was turning in the depths.
`Rope! ' muttered Sam. `I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! '
As these dangers became more frequent their march became slower. Alreadythey seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly to the mountains' roots.
They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort in the thought ofhalting anywhere. Frodo's spirits had risen for a while after his escape, andafter food and a draught of the cordial; but now a deep uneasiness, growing todread, crept over him again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of theknife-stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His senses weresharper and more aware of things that could not be seen. One sign of changethat he soon had noticed was that he could see more in the dark than any ofhis companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And he was in any case the bearer of theRing: it hung upon its chain against his breast, and at whiles it seemed aheavy weight. He felt the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following; buthe said nothing. He gripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went ondoggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried whispers.
There was no sound but the sound of their own feet; the dull stump of Gimli'sdwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light step of Legolas; the soft,
scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow firm footfalls ofAragorn with his long stride. When they halted for a moment they heard nothingat all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water.
Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine that he heard, something else: like thefaint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loud enough, or near enough, forhim to feel certain that he heard it; but once it had started it neverstopped, while the Company was moving. But it was not an echo, for when theyhalted it pattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had beengoing for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf came to his firstserious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch opening into three passages:
all led in the same general direction, eastwards; but the left-hand passageplunged down, while the right-hand climbed up, and the middle way seemed torun on, smooth and level but very narrow.
'I have no memory of this place at all! ' said Gandalf, standinguncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding somemarks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind wasto be seen. `I am too weary to decide,' he said, shaking his head. `And Iexpect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halt herefor what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever dark;

but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has passed.'
`Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope those wolveshaven't got him yet.'
To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was halfclosed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie awide chamber cut in the rock.
`Steady! Steady! ' cried Gandalf as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, gladto find a place where they could rest with at least more feeling of shelterthan in the open passage. `Steady! You do not know what is inside yet. I willgo first.'
He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. `There! ' he said,
pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw alarge round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at theedge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near.
'One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you weregoing to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let the guide go firstwhile you have one.'
'This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the threepassages,' said Gimli. `That hole was plainly a well for the guards' use,
covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we must all take care inthe dark.'
Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others wereunrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far aspossible from the hole in the floor, he crept to the edge and peered over. Achill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible depths. Moved by asudden impulse he groped for a loose stone, and let it drop. He felt his heartbeat many times before there was any sound. Then far below, as if the stonehad fallen into deep water in some cavernous place, there came a _plunk_, verydistant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft.
`What's that? ' cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin confessed whathe had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his eye glinting. 'Fool ofa Took! ' he growled. 'This is a serious journey, not a hobbit walking-party.
Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further nuisance. Now bequiet! '
Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came out ofthe depths faint knocks: _tom-tap, tap-tom_. They stopped, and when the echoeshad died away, they were repeated: _tap-tom, tom-tap, tap-tap, tom_. Theysounded disquietingly like signals of some sort; but after a while theknocking died away and was not heard again.
'That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,' said Gimli.
`Yes,' said Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may have nothing to dowith Peregrin's foolish stone; but probably something has been disturbed thatwould have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of the kind again! Let ushope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can go onthe first watch, as a reward,' he growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket.
Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept onturning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out of the well.
He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket, but he dared notmove or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep.
Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was deep inthought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey in the Mines, andconsidering anxiously the next course that he should take; a false turn nowmight be disastrous. After an hour he rose up and came over to Pippin.
`Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,' he said in a kindly tone.
'You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so I may as well do thewatching.'
'I know what is the matter with me,' he muttered, as he sat down by thedoor. 'I need smoke! I have not tasted it since the morning before thesnowstorm.'
The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a dark glimpse of

the old wizard huddled on the floor, shielding a glowing chip in his gnarledhands between his knees. The flicker for a moment showed his sharp nose. andthe puff of smoke.
It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had sat and watched allalone for about six hours, and had let the others rest. `And in the watches Ihave made up my mind,' he said. `I do not like the feel of the middle way; andI do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul air down there, orI am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is time we began toclimb up again.'
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched on; andthey met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but the faint gleam ofthe wizard's light, bobbing like a will-o'-the-wisp in front of them. Thepassage they had chosen wound steadily upwards. As far as they could judge itwent in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier and wider. Therewere now no openings to other galleries or tunnels on either side, and thefloor was level and sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had struckwhat once had been an important road; and they went forward quicker than theyhad done on their first march.
In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct lineeast, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or more. As the roadclimbed upwards` Frodo's spirits rose a little; but he still felt oppressed,
and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the Company andbeyond the fall and patter of their feet, a following footstep that was not anecho.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, andall were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the wallsto right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some archeddoorway into a black and empty space. There was a great draught of warmer airbehind them, and before them the darkness was cold on their faces. They haltedand crowded anxiously together.
Gandalf seemed pleased. `I chose the right way,' he said. `At last we arecoming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from theeastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate,
unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide hall. Iwill now risk a little real light.'
He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was blaze like a flashof lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, and for a second they saw avast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of stone.
Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black walls,
polished and smooth as glass, flashed and glittered. Three other entrancesthey saw, dark black arches: one straight before them eastwards, and one oneither side. Then the light went out.
`That is all that I shall venture on for the present,' said Gandalf.
'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading outto the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached themnow, but it is night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I amright, tomorrow we may actually see the morning peeping in. But in themeanwhile we had better go no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things havegone well so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we arenot through yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on theworld.'
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled closetogether in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be a steady inflowof chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as they lay hung thedarkness, hollow and immense, and they were oppressed by the loneliness andvastness of the dolven halls and endlessly branching stairs and passages. Thewildest imaginings that dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fellaltogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
`There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' saidSam; `and every one of them busier than badgers for five hundred years to make

all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for? They didn'tlive in these darksome holes surely? '
`These are not holes,' said Gimli. `This is the great realm and city ofthe Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light andsplendour, as is still remembered in our songs.'
He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep voice, whilethe echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.
He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin's Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver floor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like fishes' mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin's folk
Beneath the mountains music woke:
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge's fire is ashen-cold
No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:
The darkness dwells in Durin's halls
The shadow lies upon his tomb
In Moria, in Khazad-d.m.
But still the sunken stars appear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.

`I like that! ' said Sam. `I should like to learn it. _In Moria, inKhazad-d.m!_ But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all thoselamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still? '
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.
`Piles of jewels? ' said Gandalf. `No. The Orcs have often plunderedMoria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled,
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: theyare drowned in water每or in a shadow of fear.'
`Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ' asked Sam.
'For _mithril_,' answered Gandalf. `The wealth of Moria was not in goldand jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such thingsthey found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delvefor them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For herealone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have calledit: _mithril_ is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do nottell. Its worth was ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; forlittle is left above ground, and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. Thelodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarvestell no tale; but even as _mithril_ was the foundation of their wealth, soalso it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep, anddisturbed that from which they fled, Durin's Bane. Of what they brought tolight the Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute to Sauron,
who covets it.
`_Mithril!_ All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, andpolished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yetharder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of common silver, butthe beauty of _mithril_ did not tarnish or grow dim. The Elves dearly lovedit, and among many uses they made of it _ithildin_, starmoon, which you sawupon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave him. Iwonder what has become of it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathomhouse,
I suppose.'
`What? ' cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. `A corslet of Moria-
silver? That was a kingly gift! '
'Yes,' said Gandalf. `I never told him, but its worth was greater thanthe value of the whole Shire and everything in it.'
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched therings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walkingabout with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He feltno doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. But now histhoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to Bilbo,
and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo was still there. He wished with all hisheart that he was back there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or potteringamong the flowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or _mithril -_or theRing.
A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo was onguard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors out of deepplaces, dread came over him. His hands were cold and his brow damp. Helistened. All his mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slowhours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall.
His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that thewestern archway stood, he fancied that he could see two pale points of light,
almost like luminous eyes. He started. His head had nodded. `I must havenearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. `I was on the edge of a dream.' Hestood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into the dark,
until he was relieved by Legolas.
When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed to him that thedream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of lightapproaching, slowly. He woke and found that the others were speaking softlynear him, and that a dim light was falling on his face. High up above theeastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a long pale gleam; and

across the hall through the northern arch light also glimmered faint anddistantly.
Frodo sat up. `Good morning! ' said Gandalf: `For morning it is again atlast. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria. Beforetoday is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters ofMirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.'
'I shall be glad,' said Gimli. `I have looked on Moria, and it is verygreat, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no sign of mykindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.'
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once. `Weare tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,' he said. `I thinkthat none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.'
`No indeed! ' said Boromir. `Which way shall we take? Yonder eastwardarch? '
'Maybe,' said Gandalf. `But I du not know yet exactly where we are.
Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the north of theGreat Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. Theeastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but beforewe make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that lightin the north door. If we could find a window it would help, but I fear thatthe light comes only down deep shafts.'
Following his lead the Company passed under the northern arch. They foundthemselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the glimmer grewstronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It washigh and flat-topped, and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standinghalf open. Beyond it was a large square chamber. It was dimly lit, but totheir eyes, after so long a time in the dark, it seemed dazzlingly bright, andthey blinked as they entered.
Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the floor, and stumbled amongthings lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first make out. Thechamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further eastern wall; it slantedupwards and, far above, a small square patch of blue sky could be seen. Thelight of the shaft fell directly on a table in the middle of the room: asingle oblong block, about two feet high, upon which was laid a great slab ofwhite stone.
`It looks like a tomb,' muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a curioussense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came quickly to hisside. On the slab runes were deeply graven:
'These are Daeron's Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,' saidGandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
BALIN SON OF FUNDIN
LORD OF MORIA.'
'He is dead then,' said Frodo. `I feared it was so.' Gimli cast his hoodover his face.
_Chapter 5_
The Bridge of Khazad-d.m
The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin. Frodothought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and of Balin's visitto the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the mountains it seemed athousand years ago and on the other side of the world.
At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for anythingthat would give them tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of hisfolk. There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber, underthe shaft. By both the doors they could now see that many bones were lying,
and among them were broken swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and helms.

Some of the swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.
There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them werelarge iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and plundered; but besidethe shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been slashedand stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and other darkmarks like old blood that little of it could be read. Gandalf lifted it
carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it on the slab. Hepored over it for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli standing at hisside could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they were written bymany different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, and here and therein Elvish script.
At last Gandalf looked up. 'It seems to be a record of the fortunes ofBalin's folk,' he said. `I guess that it began with their coming to DimrillDale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to have numbers referring to theyears after their arrival. The top page is marked _one 每 three_, so at leasttwo are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!
'_We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard_ 每 I think; the nextword is blurred and burned; probably _room_ 每 _we slew many in the bright_ 每 Ithink 每 _sun in the dale. Fl车i was killed by an arrow. He slew the great_.
Then there is a blur followed by _Fl车i under grass near Mirror mere_. The nextline or two I cannot read. Then comes _We have taken the twentyfirst hall ofNorth end to dwell in. There is_I cannot read what. A _shaft_ is mentioned.
Then _Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul_.'
'The Chamber of Records,' said Gimli. `I guess that is where we nowstand.'
`Well, I can read no more for a long way,' said Gandalf, 'except the word_gold_, and _Durin's Axe_ and something _helm_. Then _Balin is now lord ofMoria_. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars another hand begins, andI can see _we found truesilver_, and later the word _wellforged_ and thensomething, I have it! _mithril_; and the last two lines _车in to seek for theupper armouries of Third Deep_, something _go westwards_, a blur,_ to Hollingate_.'
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. 'There are several pages ofthe same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged, he said; `but I canmake little of them in this light. Now there must be a number of leavesmissing, because they begin to be numbered _five_, the fifth year of thecolony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot readthem. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a largebold hand using an Elvish script.'
'That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking over the wizard's arm.
`He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.'
`I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,' said Gandalf. 'Thefirst clear word is _sorrow_, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it endsin _estre_. Yes, it must be _yestre_ followed by _day being the tenth ofnovembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in
Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut manymore ... up from east up the Silverlode_. The remainder of the page is soblurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think I can read_ we havebarred the gates_, and then _can hold them long if_, and then perhaps_horrible_ and _suffer_. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept the title that hetook for less than five years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there isno time to puzzle out the last few pages. Here is the last page of all.' Hepaused and sighed.
`It is grim reading,' he said. 'I fear their end was cruel. Listen! _Wecannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second hall.
Fr芍r and L车ni and N芍li fell there_. Then there are four lines smeared so that
I can only _read went 5 days ago_. The last lines _run the pool is up to thewall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took 车in. We cannot get out. Theend comes_, and then_ drums, drums in the deep_. I wonder what that means. The

last thing written is in a trailing scrawl of elf-letters: _they are coming_.
There is nothing more.' Gandalf paused and stood in silent thought.
A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company. `_Wecannot get out_,' muttered Gimli. 'It was well for us that the pool had sunk alittle, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.'
Gandalf raised his head and looked round. `They seem to have made a laststand by both doors,' he said; 'but there were not many left by that time. Soended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The time is notcome yet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here hemust lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this book, the Book ofMazarbul, and look at it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli,
and take it back to D芍in, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though itwill grieve him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.'
'Which way shall we go? ' asked Boromir.
'Back to the hall,' answered Gandalf. 'But our visit to this room has notbeen in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, theChamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end.
Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right andsouth, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should be on the Seventh Level,
that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! '
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great noise: arolling _Boom_ that seemed to come from depths far below, and to tremble inthe stone at their feet. They sprang towards the door in alarm. _Doom, doom_
it rolled again, as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria intoa vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great horn was blown in thehall, and answering horns and harsh cries were heard further off. There was ahurrying sound of many feet.
`They are coming! ' cried Legolas.
'We cannot get out,' said Gimli.
`Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. `Why did I delay? Here we are, caught, just asthey were before. But I was not here then. We will see what 每每每-'
_Doom, doom_ came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And keep your packson as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.'
`No! ' said Gandalf. 'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar!
We will go that way, if we get a chance.'
Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming downthe corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Company drew their swords.
Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges. Boromir sethis shoulder against the western door.
`Wait a moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward toBoromir's side and drew himself up to his full height.
'Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria? ' he cried
in a loud voice.
There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones intoa pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command. Doom, boom, doomwent the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow opening of thedoor and thrust forward his staff: There was a dazzling flash that lit thechamber and the passage outside. For an instant the wizard looked out. Arrowswhined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back.
'There are Orcs, very many of them,' he said. `And some are large andevil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but thereis something else there. A great cave-troll, I think, or more than one. Thereis no hope of escape that way.'
'And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,' saidBoromir.
'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing bythe eastern door listening. `The passage on this side plunges straight down a

stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it is no goodflying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind. We cannot block thedoor. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it opens inwards. We must dosomething to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber ofMazarbul!' he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And~ril.
Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir flung himself against thedoor and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken sword-blades andsplinters of wood. The Company retreated to the other side of the chamber. Butthey had no chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made itquiver; and then it began to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. Ahuge arm and shoulder, with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust throughthe widening gap. Then a great, flat, toeless foot was forced through below.
There was a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but hissword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand. The blade wasnotched.
Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze up in hisheart. `The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, andstabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the footjerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo's arm. Black drops dripped fromthe blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir hurled himself against the door andslammed it again.
`One for the Shire! ' cried Aragorn. `The hobbit's bite is deep! You havea good blade, Frodo son of Drogo! '
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams andhammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back, and theopening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but struck the northernwall, and fell harmlessly to the floor. There was a horn-blast and a rush offeet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could not count. The affray was sharp,
but the orcs were dismayed by the fierceness of the defence. Legolas shot twothrough the throat. Gimli hewed the legs from under another that had sprung upon Balin's tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thirteen had fallen therest fled shrieking. leaving the defenders unharmed, except for Sam who had ascratch along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled hisorc: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A fire was smouldering in hisbrown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step backwards, if he had seenit.
`Now is the time! ' cried Gandalf. `Let us go, before the troll returns!'
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached thestair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black mail fromhead to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind him his followers clustered inthe doorway. His broad flat face was swart, his eyes were like coals, and histongue was red; he wielded a great spear. With a thrust of his huge hideshield he turned Boromir's sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to theground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the speed of a striking snake hecharged into the Company and thrust with his spear straight at Frodo. The blowcaught him on the right side, and Frodo was hurled against the wall andpinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the spear-shaft, and it broke. But even asthe orc flung down the truncheon and swept out his scimitar, And~ril came downupon his helm. There was a flash like flame and the helm burst asunder. Theorc fell with cloven head. His followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragornsprang at them.
again.
_Doom, doom_ went the drums in the deep. The great voice rolled out
'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! '
Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for the stair,
pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others followed; but Gimli had

to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered by Balin'stomb with his head bowed. Boromir hauled the eastern door to, grinding uponits hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, but could not be fastened.
'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. `I can walk. Put me down! '
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. 'I thought you were dead! '
he cried.
'Not yet! ' said Gandalf. 'But there is time for wonder. Off you go, allof you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if I donot come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose paths leading right anddownwards.'
'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn.
`Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely. `Swords are no more use here. Go!'
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped theirway down a long flight of steps, and then looked back; but they could seenothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the wizard's staff. Heseemed to be still standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathedheavily and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They stood peeringup the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear the voice ofGandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with a sighingecho. He could not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling.
Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: _doom, doom_.
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light. Thenthere was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke out wildly:
_doom-boom, doom-boom_, and then stopped. Gandalf came flying down the stepsand fell to the ground in the midst of the Company.
`Well, well! That's over! ' said the wizard struggling to his feet. `Ihave done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly beendestroyed. But don't stand here! Go on! You will have to do without light fora while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are you, Gimli? Come aheadwith me! Keep close behind, all of you!'
They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. _Doom, doom_ wentthe drum-beats again: they now sounded muffled and far away, but they werefollowing. There was no other sound of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor anyvoice. Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to begoing in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended aflight of steps, fifty or more, to a lower level. At the moment that was theirchief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they came onit, and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground with hisstaff like a blind man.
At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, andhad descended many flights of stairs. There was still no sound of pursuit.
Almost they began to hope that they would escape. At the bottom of the seventhflight Gandalf halted.
`It is getting hot! ' he gasped. `We ought to be down at least to thelevel of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand turn to
take us east. I hope it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest here amoment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.'
Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step. `Whathappened away up there at the door? ' he asked. `Did you meet the beater ofthe drums? '
'I do not know,' answered Gandalf. `But I found myself suddenly faced bysomething that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but totry and put a shutting-spell on the door. I know many; but to do things ofthat kind rightly requires time, and even then the door can be broken bystrength.
`As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side: at anymoment I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear what was said;
they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language. All I caught was_ghash;_ that is "fire". Then something came into the chamber 每 I felt it

through the door, and the orcs themselves were afraid and fell silent. It laidhold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my spell.
'What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge. Thecounter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door leftmy control and began to open! I had to speak a word of Command. That provedtoo great a strain. The door burst in pieces. Something dark as a cloud wasblocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down the stairs.
All the wall gave way, and the roof of the chamber as well, I think.
`I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is buriedthere too. I cannot say. But at least the passage behind us was completelyblocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is passing. And now what aboutyou, Frodo? There was not time to say so, but I have never been more delightedin my life than when you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbitthat Aragorn was carrying.'
`What about me? ' said Frodo. 'I am alive, and whole I think. I ambruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.'
`Well,' said Aragorn, `I can only say that hobbits are made of a stuff sotough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I would have spokensofter in the Inn at Bree! That spear-thrust would have skewered a wild boar!
'
'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,' said Frodo; `though Ifeel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.' He said no more.
He found breathing painful.
'You take after Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `There is more about you than meetsthe eye, as I said of him long ago.' Frodo wondered if the remark meant morethan it said.
They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen eyes in thedark. `I think,' he said, `that there is a light ahead. But it is notdaylight. It is red. What can it be? '
`_Ghash!_' muttered Gandalf. `I wonder if that is what they meant: thatthe lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.'
Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by all. It wasflickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before them. Theycould now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some wayahead there stood a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The airbecame very hot.
When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to them to wait.
As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face lit by a red glow.
Quickly he stepped back.
`There is some new devilry here,' he said, 'devised for our welcome nodoubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First Deep, the levelimmediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and theGates are near: away beyond the eastern end, on the left, not more than aquarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair, along a wide roadthrough the First Hall, and out! But come and look! '
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftierand far longer than the one in which they had slept. They were near itseastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the centre stalked adouble line of towering pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty treeswhose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stemswere smooth and black, but a red glow was darkly mirrored in their sides.
Right across the floor, close to the feet of two huge pillars a great fissurehad opened. Out of it a fierce red light came, and now and again flames lickedat the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps of dark smokewavered in the hot air.
'If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we shouldhave been trapped here,' said Gandalf. `Let us hope that the fire now liesbetween us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.'
Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: _Doom, doom,

doom_. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall there came criesand horn-calls. _Doom, doom_: the pillars seemed to tremble and the flames toquiver.
`Now for the last race! ' said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside wemay still escape. After me! '
He turned left and sped across the smooth floor of the hall. The distancewas greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and echo ofmany hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up: they had been seen. Therewas a ring and clash of steel. An arrow whistled over Frodo's head.
Boromir laughed. `They did not expect this,' he said. `The fire has cutthem off. We are on the wrong side! '
`Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. `The Bridge is near. It is dangerous andnarrow.'
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall thefloor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door could only bereached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned thechasm with one curving spring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of theDwarves against any enemy that might capture the First Hall and the outerpassages. They could only pass across it in single file. At the brink Gandalfhalted and the others came up in a pack behind.
'Lead the way, Gimli! ' he said. 'Pippin and Merry next. Straight on andup the stair beyond the door! '
Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back. Another piercedGandalf's hat and stuck there like a black feather. Frodo looked behind.
Beyond the fire he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to be hundreds oforcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as blood in thefirelight. _Doom, doom_ rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and louder,
_doom, doom_.
Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long shotfor his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to theground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great trolls appeared; they boregreat slabs of stone, and flung them down to serve as gangways over the fire.
But it was not the trolls that had filled the Elf with terror. The ranks of
the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they themselves were afraid.
Something was coming up behind them. What it was could not be seen: it waslike a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shapemaybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and to go beforeit.
It came to the edge of the fire and the light faded as if a cloud hadbent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the fissure. The flames roaredup to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in the air.
Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand was ablade like a stabbing tongue of fire; in its left it held a whip of manythongs.
'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! '
Gimli stared with wide eyes. `Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting hisaxe fall he covered his face.
'A Balrog,' muttered Gandalf. `Now I understand.' He faltered and leanedheavily on his staff. `What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.'
The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The orcs yelledand poured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his horn and blew.
Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many throats under thecavernous roof. For a moment the orcs quailed and the fiery shadow halted.
Then the echoes died as suddenly as a flame blown out by a dark wind, and theenemy advanced again.
'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. `Fly! This is afoe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly! ' Aragorn and Boromirdid not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side, behindGandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within the

doorway at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their leader to facethe enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span,
leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand Glamdringgleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadowabout it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongswhined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm.
`You cannot pass,' he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead silencefell. `I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. Youcannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Ud.n. Go back to theShadow! You cannot pass.'
The Balrog made no answer. The fire in it seemed to die, but the darknessgrew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it drew itselfup to a great height, and its wings were spread from wall to wall; but stillGandalf could be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed small, andaltogether alone: grey and bent, like a wizened tree before the onset of astorm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming.
Glamdring glittered white in answer.
There was a ringing clash and a stab of white fire. The Balrog fell backand its sword flew up in molten fragments. The wizard swayed on the bridge,
stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
'You cannot pass! ' he said.
With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip whirled andhissed.
'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along thebridge. '_Elendil!_' he shouted. 'I am with you, Gandalf! '
`Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote thebridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his hand. A blindingsheet of white flame sprang up. The bridge cracked. Right at the Balrog's feetit broke, and the stone upon which it stood crashed into the gulf, while therest remained, poised, quivering like a tongue of rock thrust out intoemptiness.
With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged downand vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whip, and the thongs lashed andcurled about the wizard's knees, dragging him to the brink. He staggered andfell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid into the abyss. 'Fly, you fools!
' he cried, and was gone.
The fires went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company stood rootedwith horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn and Boromir came flyingback, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry Aragorn roused them.
'Come! I will lead you now! ' he called. 'We must obey his last command.
Follow me! '
They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door. Aragornleading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage. Alongthis they fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that hehimself was weeping as he ran. _Doom, doom, doom_ the drum-beats rolledbehind, mournful now and slow; _doom!_
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof.
They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, bright with daylight from its highwindows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors theypassed, and suddenly before them the Great Gates opened, an arch of blazing
light.
There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind the great doorposts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and cast down.
Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his path, and the restfled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past them and took no heed ofthem. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down the huge and age-worn steps,

the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind ontheir faces.
They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls. DimrillDale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it, buteastwards there was a golden light on the land. It was but one hour afternoon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high.
They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under themountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum-beats:
_doom_. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the daleall around was empty. _Doom_. Grief at last wholly overcame them, and theywept long: some standing and silent, some cast upon the ground. _Doom, doom_.
The drum-beats faded.
_Chapter 6_
Lothl车rien
'Alas! I Fear we cannot stay here longer,' said Aragorn. He lookedtowards the mountains and held up his sword. `Farewell, Gandalf! ' he cried.
'Did I not say to you: _if you pass the doors of Moria, beware_? Alas that Ispoke true! What hope have we without you? '
He turned to the Company. `We must do without hope,' he said. `At leastwe may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no more! Come! We have along road, and much to do.'
They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran up into a glen ofshadows between two great arms of the mountains, above which three white peakswere shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria. At thehead of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over an endless ladder ofshort falls, and a mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains' feet.
`Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,' said Aragorn, pointing to the falls. 'Downthe deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should have come, iffortune had been kinder.'
`Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. `There he stands smiling in thesun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turnedaway.
To the east the outflung arm of the mountains marched to a sudden end,
and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and vague. To the south theMisty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than amile away, and a little below them, for they still stood high up on the westside of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a greatspear-head thrust deep into the northern glen; but its southern end was beyondthe shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue likeclear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still and unruffled.
About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides to its bare unbrokenrim.
`There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zaram! ' said Gimli sadly. `Iremember that he said: "May you have joy of the sight! But we cannot lingerthere." Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again. It is I that musthasten away, and he that must remain.'
The Company now went down the road from the Gates. It was rough andbroken, fading to a winding track between heather and whin that thrust amidthe cracking stones. But still it could be seen that once long ago a greatpaved way had wound upwards from the lowlands of the Dwarf-kingdom. In placesthere were ruined works of stone beside the path, and mounds of green toppedwith slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward bend ledthem hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadsidestood a single column broken at the top.
'That is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. `I cannot pass without turningaside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! '

`Be swift then! ' said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates. `The Sunsinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we mustbe far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will be darktonight.'
'Come with me, Frodo! ' cried the dwarf, springing from the road. `Iwould not have you go without seeing Kheled-zaram.' He ran down the long greenslope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue water in spite of hurtand weariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was cracked andweather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could not be read. `Thispillar marks the spot where Durin first looked in the Mirrormere,' said thedwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!'
They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see nothing. Thenslowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profoundblue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond therewas a space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars,
though sunlight was in the sky above. Of their own stooping forms no shadowcould be seen.
'O Kheled-zaram fair and wonderful! ' said Gimli. `There lies the Crown
of Durin till he wakes. Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastenedback up the green-sward to the road again.
`What did you see? ' said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in thoughtto answer.
The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, running out frombetween the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere they came on a deep wellof water, clear as crystal, from which a freshet fell over a stone lip and ranglistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel.
'Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. `Do notdrink of it! It is icy cold.'
'Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many othermountain-streams,' said Aragorn. `Our road leads beside it for many miles. ForI shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and first I hope to come tothe woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River-out yonder.' Theylooked as he pointed, and before them they could see the stream leaping downto the trough of the valley, and then running on and away into the lowerlands, until it was lost in a golden haze.
`There lie the woods of Lothl车rien! ' said Legolas. `That is the fairestof all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees of thatland. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not till thespring comes and the new green opens do they fall, and then the boughs areladen with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden, and golden isthe roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of the trees is smoothand grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I werebeneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! '
`My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn. 'But it liesmany miles away. Let us hasten! '
For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the others; butAragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a while they laggedbehind. They had eaten nothing since the early morning. Sam's cut was burninglike fire, and his head felt light. In spite of the shining sun the windseemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt everystep more painful and he gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke toAragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to comewith him.
'I am sorry, Frodo! ' he cried, full of concern. `So much has happenedthis day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you werehurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease you,
as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after us. Come now! A littlefurther on there is a place where we can rest for a little. There I will do

what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.'
Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down from thewest, and joined its bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Togetherthey plunged over a fall of green-hued stone, and foamed down into a dell.
About it stood fir-trees, short and bent, and its sides were steep and clothedwith harts-tongue and shrubs of whortle-berry. At the bottom there was a levelspace through which the stream flowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here theyrested. It was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had come only a fewmiles from the Gates. Already the sun was westering.
While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of brush- and fir-
wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was not deep,
but it looked ugly, and Aragorn's face was grave as he examined it. After amoment he looked up with relief.
'Good luck, Sam! ' he said. 'Many have received worse than this inpayment for the slaying of their first orc. The cut is not poisoned, as thewounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended it.
Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.'
He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. `They are dry andsome of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of theleaves of _athelas_ that I gathered near Weathertop. Crush one in the water,
and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! '
'I am all right,' said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.
`AII I needed was some food and a little rest.'
`No! ' said Aragorn. `We must have a look and see what the hammer and theanvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at all.' Gently hestripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of wonder.
Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like the lightupon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it off and held it up, and the gems onit glittered like stars. and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkleof rain in a pool.
`Look, my friends!' he called. `Here's a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap anelven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides, all thehunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.'
`And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,'
said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. `It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! Ihave never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf
spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! '
`I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in hislittle room,' said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. Ihope we get a chance of telling him about it! '
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast.
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the ringshad been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scoredand bruised where he had been hurled against the wall. While the others setthe food ready. Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas wassteeped. The pungent fragrance filled the dell, and all those who stooped overthe steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the painleave him, and his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to the touchfor many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
`The mail is marvellously light,' he said. `Put it on again, if you canbear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do not lay itaside, even in sleep, unless fortune brings you where you are safe for awhile; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.'
When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put out thefire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they took to theroad again. They had not gone far before the sun sank behind the westwardheights and great shadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk veiled theirfeet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the evening light laypale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and Frodo now feelingeased and greatly refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one

brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more hours.
It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear stars, hut thefast-waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and Frodo were at therear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound upon the roadbehind. At length Gimli broke the silence.
'Not a sound but the wind,' he said. `There are no goblins near, or myears are made of wood. It is to be hoped that the Orcs will be content withdriving us from Moria. And maybe that was all their purpose, and they hadnothing else to do with us-with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foesfor many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.'
Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade was dull. Yet hehad heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the shadows had fallenabout them and the road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter offeet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams oflight behind, or for a moment he thought he saw them, but at once they slippedaside and vanished.
`What is it? ' said the dwarf.
`I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet, and I thought Isaw a light-like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered Moria.'
Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. 'I hear nothing but the night-
speech of plant and stone,' he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others are outof sight.'
The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. Before them a widegrey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of leaves like poplars inthe breeze.
`Lothl车rien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothl车rien! We have come to the eaves ofthe Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! '
Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the roadand stream that ran suddenly beneath their spreading boughs. In the dim lightof the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint offallow gold.
'Lothl车rien! ' said Aragorn. 'Glad I am to hear again the wind in thetrees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we cango no further. Here let us hope that the virtue of the Elves will keep ustonight from the peril that comes behind.'
`If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli.
'It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the landwhence we wandered in ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that L车rienis not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here that holds evil from theland. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now deep inthe woods and far from the northern border.'
'Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as if somememory stirred in him. `We must fend for ourselves tonight. We will go forwarda short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn asidefrom the path and seek a place to rest in.'
He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not follow. 'Isthere no other way? ' he said.
`What other fairer way would you desire? ' said Aragorn.
`A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir.
`By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far to evil fortune.
Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now wemust enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heardin Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that fewnone have escaped unscathed.'
`Say not _unscathed_, but if you say _unchanged_, then maybe you willspeak the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in thecity of those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothl车rien. Believewhat you will, there is no other way for us 每 unless you would go back toMoria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim the Great River allalone.'

`Then lead on! ' said Boromir. `But it is perilous.'
`Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil needfear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me! '
They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they came uponanother stream flowing down swiftly from the tree-clad slopes that climbedback westward towards the mountains. They heard it splashing over a fall awayamong the shadows on their right. Its dark hurrying waters ran across the pathbefore them, and joined the Silverlode in a swirl of dim pools among the rootsof trees.
`Here is Nimrodel! ' said Legolas. 'Of this stream the Silvan Elves mademany songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North, remembering therainbow on its falls, and the golden flowers that floated in its foam. All isdark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my feet, forit is said that the water is healing to the weary.' He went forward andclimbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped into the stream.
`Follow me!' he cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade across! On thefurther bank we can rest. and the sound of the falling water may bring ussleep and forgetfulness of grief.'
One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a moment Frodostood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold
but its touch was clean, and as he went on and it mounted to his knees, hefelt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.
When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a littlefood; and Legolas told them tales of Lothl车rien that the Elves of Mirkwoodstill kept in their hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by theGreat River before the world was grey.
At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfallrunning sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could hear avoice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.
`Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? ' asked Legolas. 'I will sing you asong of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the stream beside whichshe lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this is howit runs in the Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.' In a softvoice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them he began:
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.
A star was bound upon her brows,
A light was on her hair
As sun upon the golden boughs
In L车rien the fair.
Her hair was long, her limbs were white,
And fair she was and free;
And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.
Beside the falls of Nimrodel,
By water clear and cool,
Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining pool.
Where now she wanders none can tell,
In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.

The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothl车rien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his flowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.
But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. 'I cannot sing anymore,' he said. 'That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It is long andsad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothl车rien, L车rien of the Blossom, whenthe Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.'
`But the Dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli.
`I said not so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly. `Then many of theElves of Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and departed and she was lostfar in the South, in the passes of the White Mountains; and she came not tothe ship where Amroth her lover waited for her. But in the spring when thewind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be heard by thefalls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the voice of
Amroth comes up from the sea; for Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, that Elvescall Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin the Great. and Anduin flows into theBay of Belfalas whence the Elves of L车rien set sail. But neither Nimrodel norAmroth ever came back.
'It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that
grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of L车rien, to dwellin the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were called theGaladhrim, the Tree-people. Deep in their forest the trees are very great. Thepeople of the woods did not delve in the ground like Dwarves, nor build strong

places of stone before the Shadow came.'
`And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be thoughtsafer than sitting on the ground,' said Gimli. He looked across the stream tothe road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of darkboughs above.
`Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn. `We cannot build ahouse, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the treetops,
if we can. We have sat here beside the road already longer than waswise.'
The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the shadow ofthe deeper woods, westward along the mountain-stream away from Silverlode. Notfar from the falls of Nimrodel they found a cluster of trees, some of whichoverhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty girth, but theirheight could not be guessed.
`I will climb up,' said Legolas. `I am at home among trees, by root orbough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in song.
_Mellyrn_ they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom, but Ihave never climbed in one. I will see now what is their shape and way ofgrowth.'
`Whatever it may be,' said Pippin, `they will be marvellous trees indeedif they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot sleep on aperch! '
'Then dig a hole in the ground,' said Legolas, `if that is more after thefashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, if you wish to hidefrom Orcs.' He sprang lightly up from the ground and caught a branch that grewfrom the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for a moment, avoice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him.
`_Daro!_' it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to earthin surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.
'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. `Do not move or speak! '
There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then anotherclear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of whatwas said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east of the mountains used amongthemselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and answered in thesame language.
`Who are they, and what do they say? ' asked Merry.
`They're Elves,' said Sam. `Can't you hear their voices? '
`Yes, they are Elves,' said Legolas; `and they say that you breathe soloud that they could shoot you in the dark.' Sam hastily put his hand over hismouth. 'But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been aware ofus for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and knew that Iwas one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not hinder ourcrossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up withFrodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey. Theothers they ask to wait a little and to keep watch at the foot of the tree,
until they have decided what is to be done.'
Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope, silver-
grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender it proved strongenough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo followed slowly;
behind came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches of the mallorn-treegrew out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept upward; but near thetop the main stem divided into a crown of many boughs, and among these theyfound that there had been built a wooden platform, or _flet_ as such thingswere called in those days: the Elves called it a _talan_. It was reached by around hole in the centre through which the ladder passed.
When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated withthree other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could not be seen amongthe tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of themuncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam. He held it up,

looking at Frodo's face, and Sam's. Then he shut off the light again, andspoke words of welcome in his elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return.
`Welcome!' the Elf then said again in the Common Language, speakingslowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heartof the forest, and do not willingly have dealings with any other folk. Evenour own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there are some of us
still who go abroad for the gathering of news and the watching of our enemies,
and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. Mybrothers, R~mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue.
`But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrondpassed by L车rien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard ofhobbits, or halflings, for many a long year, and did not know that any yetdwelt in Middle-earth. You do not look evil! And since you come with an Elf ofour kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as Elrond asked; though it is notour custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here tonight.
How many are you? '
`Eight,' said Legolas. `Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom,
Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.'
`The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in L车rien,' said Haldir,
`and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you have yet spokenonly of seven.'
`The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas.
`A dwarf! ' said Haldir. `That is not well. We have not had dealings withthe Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I cannotallow him to pass.'
`But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of D芍in's trusty people, andfriendly to Elrond,' said Frodo. `Elrond himself chose him to be one of ourcompanions, and he has been brave and faithful.'
The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas in theirown tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. `We will do this, though it isagainst our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer for him,
he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothl车rien.
`But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain on theground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a greattroop of Orcs going north toward Moria, along the skirts of the mountains,
many days ago. Wolves are howling on the wood's borders. If you have indeedcome from Moria, the peril cannot be far behind. Tomorrow early you must goon.
'The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us-we do not fearthem! There is another _talan_ in the next tree. There the others must take
refuge. You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call us, if anything isamiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!'
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soonafterwards Merry and Pippin clambered up on to the high flet. They were out ofbreath and seemed rather scared.
`There!' said Merry panting. `We have lugged up your blankets as well asour own. Strider has hidden all the rest of the baggage in a deep drift ofleaves.'
`You had no need of your burdens,' said Haldir. `It is cold in the treetops
in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we have food anddrink to give you that will drive away the night-chill, and we have skins andcloaks to spare.'
The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper very gladly.
Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only in the fur-cloaks of the Elves,
but in their own blankets as well, and tried to go to sleep. But weary as theywere only Sam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like heights, and do notsleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet was not at all totheir liking as a bedroom. It had no walls. not even a rail; only on one sidewas there a light plaited screen, which could be moved and fixed in different

places according to the wind.
Pippin went on talking for a while. `I hope, if I do go to sleep in thisbed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said.
`Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i shall go on sleeping, whether Iroll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I'll drop off, if you take mymeaning.'
Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glintingthrough the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side longbefore he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey forms of twoelves sitting motionless with their arms about their knees, speaking inwhispers. The other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lowerbranches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and the sweet murmurof the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolasrunning in his mind.
Late in the night he awoke. The other hobbits were asleep. The Elves weregone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves. The wind was still.
A little way off he heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on theground below. There was a ring of metal. The sounds died slowly away, andseemed to go southward, on into the wood.
A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat up inalarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits.
`What is it? ' said Frodo.
`_Yrch!_' said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the flet therope-ladder rolled up.
'Orcs! ' said Frodo. `What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone.
There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the veryfalls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shivered in his wraps. He wasthankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but he felt that thetrees offered little protection, except concealment. Orcs were as keen ashounds on a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew out Sting:
it flashed and glittered like a blue flame and then slowly faded again andgrew dull. In spite of the fading of his sword the feeling of immediate dangerdid not leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and crawled to theopening and peered down. He was almost certain that he could hear stealthymovements at the tree's foot far below.
Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in theirmovements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemedto be scrabbling on the bark of the tree-trunk. He stared down into the dark,
holding his breath.
Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a softhissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem, Frodo saw twopale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they turned away,
and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished.
Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up through thebranches. `There was something in this tree that I have never seen before,' hesaid. `It was not an orc. It fled as soon as I touched the tree-stem. It
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I might have thoughtthat it was one of you hobbits.
'I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot riskbattle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the Nimrodel-cursetheir foul feet in its clean water!-and went on down the old road beside the
river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for awhile near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge ahundred, so we went ahead and spoke with feigned voices, leading them on intothe wood.
`Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn our people.
None of the Orcs will ever return out of L车rien. And there will be many Elveshidden on the northern border before another night falls. But you must takethe road south as soon as it is fully light.'

Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it filtered through theyellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that the early sunof a cool summer's morning was shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the movingbranches. Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet Frodo sawall the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of fallow gold tossinggently in the breeze.
The morning was still young and cold when the Company set out again,
guided now by Haldir and his brother R~mil. `Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! ' criedLegolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of white foam among the greytree-stems. `Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him that he would never hearagain a running water so beautiful, for ever blending its innumerable notes inan endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that still went on along the west side of theSilverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the printsof orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees and
halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.
`There is one of my people yonder across the stream,' he said `though youmay not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out of athicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood thrownback; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully castover the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end abouta tree near the bank.
`Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,' said Haldir 'andit runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it so farnorth, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness we do not makebridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He made his end of the rope fastabout another tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river and backagain, as if he were on a road.
`I can walk this path,' said Legolas; `but the others have not thisskill. Must they swim?'
`No!' said Haldir. `We have two more ropes. We will fasten them above theother, one shoulder-high, and another half-high, and holding these thestrangers should be able to cross with care.'
When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed over, somecautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of the hobbits Pippin proved thebest for he was sure-footed, and he walked over quickly, holding only with onehand; but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Samshuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying wateras if it was a chasm in the mountains.
He breathed with relief when he was safely across. `Live and learn! as mygaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening, not of roosting likea bird, nor of trying to walk like a spider. Not even my uncle Andy ever did atrick like that! '
When at length all the Company was gathered on the east bank of theSilverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of them. R~mil, who hadremained on the other side, drew back the last one, slung it on his shoulder,
and with a wave of his hand went away, back to Nimrodel to keep watch.
`Now, friends,' said Haldir, `you have entered the Naith of L车rien or theGore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a spear-head betweenthe arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We allow no strangers to spy outthe secrets of the Naith. Few indeed are permitted even to set foot there.
`As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. Theother may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, downin Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.'
This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. `The agreement was madewithout my consent,' he said. `I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or aprisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had dealings with any of theservants of the Enemy. Neither have we done harm to the Elves. I am no morelikely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.'
'I do not doubt you,' said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am not the

master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in letting youset foot over Celebrant.'
Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet firmly apart, and laid his handupon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will goback and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of word, though Iperish alone in the wilderness.'
`You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far,
you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall judge you, tohold you or to give you leave, as they will. You cannot cross the riversagain, and behind you there are now secret sentinels that you cannot pass. Youwould be slain before you saw them.'
Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent theirbows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.
'Come!' said Aragorn. `If I am still to lead this Company, you must do asI bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus singled out. We will all beblindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make the journeyslow and dull.'
Gimli laughed suddenly. `A merry troop of fools we shall look! WillHaldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one dog? But Iwill be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.'
turn.
`I am an Elf and a kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry in his
`Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn.
`But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! '
`I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do notlead us well,' said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.
'You will have no claim,' said Haldir. `I shall lead you well, and thepaths are smooth and straight.'
`Alas for the folly of these days! ' said Legolas. 'Here all are enemiesof the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry in thewoodland under leaves of gold! '
`Folly it may seem,' said Haldir. 'Indeed in nothing is the power of theDark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangement that divides all thosewho still oppose him. Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in theworld beyond Lothl车rien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by ourown trust endanger our land. We live now upon an island amid many perils, andour hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp.
`The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for theShadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of departing, yet for thatit already seems too late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; to theeast the lands are waste, and full of Sauron's creatures; and it is rumouredthat we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan, and the mouths of theGreat River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores ofthe Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there. It is said that there arestill havens of. the High Elves, but they are far north and west, beyond theland of the Halflings. But where that may be, though the Lord and Lady mayknow, I do not.'
`You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,' said Merry. `Thereare Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.'
`Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea! ' saidHaldir. 'It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet stillwe remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.'
`I cannot,' said Merry. `I have never seen them. I have never been out ofmy own land before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. Idon't think I should have had the heart to leave it.'
`Not even to see fair Lothl车rien? ' said Haldir. 'The world is indeed
full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is muchthat is fair, and though in all lands love is now mingled with grief, it growsperhaps the greater.
`Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw back and

peace shall come again. Yet I do not believe that the world about us will everagain be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. Forthe Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass tothe Sea unhindered and leave the Middle-earth for ever. Alas for Lothl车rien
that I love! It would be a poor life in a land where no mallorn grew. But ifthere are mallorn-trees beyond the Great Sea, none have reported it.'
As they spoke thus, the Company filed slowly along the paths in the wood,
led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground beneaththeir feet smooth and soft, and after a while they walked more freely, withoutfear of hurt or fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo found his hearing andother senses sharpened. He could smell the trees and the trodden grass. Hecould hear many different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead, theriver murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds in thesky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when they passed through an open
glade.
As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a strange feelinghad come upon him, and it deepened as he walked on into the Naith: it seemedto him that he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of the ElderDays, and was -now walking in a world that was no more. In Rivendell there wasmemory of ancient things; in L车rien the ancient things still lived on in thewaking world. Evil had been seen and heard there, sorrow had been known; theElves feared and distrusted the world outside: wolves were howling on thewood's borders: but on the land of L车rien no shadow lay.
All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the cool eveningcome and heard the early night-wind whispering among many leaves. Then theyrested and slept without fear upon the ground; for their guides would notpermit them to unbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morningthey went on again, walking without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo wasaware that they had passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard thesound of many voices all around him.
A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were hastening towardthe northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they broughtnews, some of which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs had been waylaid andalmost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the mountains, andwere being pursued. A strange creature also had been seen, running with bentback and with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape.
It had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing whether it wasgood or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode southward.
`Also,' said Haldir, `they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady ofthe Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems thatthe Lady knows who and what is each member of your Company. New messages havecome from Rivendell perhaps.'
He removed the bandage first from Gimli's eyes. 'Your pardon! ' he said,
bowing low. `Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for you arethe first dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith of L车rien since Durin's Day!
'
When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up and caught hisbreath. They were standing in an open space. To the left stood a great mound,
covered with a sward of grass as green as Spring-time in the Elder Days. Uponit, as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer had bark of snowywhite, and were leafless but beautiful in their shapely nakedness; the innerwere mallorn-trees of great height, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid thebranches of a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed awhite flet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the green hillsides thegrass was studded with small golden flowers shaped like stars. Among them,
nodding on slender stalks, were other flowers, white and palest green: theyglimmered as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over all the sky was blue,
and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill and cast long green shadowsbeneath the trees.
'Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,' said Haldir. `For this is the

heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the mound ofAmroth, where in happier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom thewinter flowers in the unfading grass: the yellow _elanor_, and the pale_niphredil_. Here we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrimat dusk.'
The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but Frodo stoodawhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had stepped through ahigh window that looked on a vanished world. A light was upon it for which hislanguage had no name. All that he saw was shapely, but the shapes seemed atonce clear cut, as if they had been first conceived and drawn at theuncovering of his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He saw nocolour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, but they werefresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment first perceived them and madefor them names new and wonderful. In winter here no heart could mourn for
summer or for spring. No blemish or sickness or deformity could be seen inanything that grew upon the earth. On the land of L车rien there was no stain.
He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking roundwith a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not sure that hewas awake. `It's sunlight and bright day, right enough,' he said. `I thoughtthat Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than anythingI ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was _inside_ a song. if you take mymeaning.'
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of boththought and word. He smiled. `You feel the power of the Lady of theGaladhrim,' he said. `Would it please you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth? '
They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad slopes. Thoughhe walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were stirredby the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that he was in a timelessland that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When he had goneand passed again into the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer from the Shirewould walk there, upon the grass among _elanor_ and _niphredil_ in fairLothl车rien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South Windblew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches. Frodo stood still,
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away,
and sea-birds crying whose race had perished from the earth.
Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet. As Frodoprepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside the ladder:
never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware of the feel andtexture of a tree's skin and of the life within it. He felt a delight in woodand the touch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was the delightof the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his handand turned him toward the South. `Look this way first! ' he said.
Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mightytrees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it,
it seemed to him that the power and light came that held all the land in sway.
He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the green city. Then helooked eastward and saw all the land of L车rien running down to the pale gleamof Anduin, the Great River. He lifted his eyes across the river and all thelight went out, and he was back again in the world he knew. Beyond the riverthe land appeared flat and empty, formless and vague, until far away it roseagain like a wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothl车rien had no powerto enlighten the shadow of that distant height.
`There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,' said Haldir. `It is cladin a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and theirbranches rot and wither. In the midst upon a stony height stands Dol Guldur,
where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is inhabitedagain, and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it of late. In

this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one to another;
and ever they strive now in thought, but whereas the light perceives the veryheart of the darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not yet.' Heturned and climbed swiftly down, and they followed him.
At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as atree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was inhis eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked at him heknew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For thegrim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed inwhite, a young lord tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue toone whom Frodo could not see_. Arwen vanimelda, nam芍ri.!_ he said, and then hedrew a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and smiled.
`Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, `and here my heartdwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that we still musttread, you and I. Come with me! ' And taking Frodo's hand in his, he left thehill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man.
_Chapter 7_
The Mirror of Galadriel
The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows were deepeningin the woods, when they went on again. Their paths now went into thicketswhere the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees as theywalked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under apale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a wide treeless spacebefore them, running in a great circle and bending away on either hand. Beyondit was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its brink wasgreen, as if it glowed still in memory of the sun that had gone. Upon thefurther side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a green hillthronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in all the land.
Their height could not be guessed, but they stood up in the twilight likeliving towers. In their, many-tiered branches and amid their ever-movingleaves countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldirturned towards the Company.
`Welcome to Caras Galadhon! ' he said. 'Here is the city of the Galadhrimwhere dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady of L车rien. But we cannotenter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go round to thesouthern side, and the way is not short, for the city is great.'
There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer brink of thefosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever climbing up like agreen cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened more lights sprangforth, until all the hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last to awhite bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they facedsouth-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall that here overlapped,
and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened soundlessly; but of guardsFrodo could see no sign. The travellers passed within, and the gates shutbehind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, andpassing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk couldthey see, nor hear any feet upon the paths; but there were many voices, aboutthem, and in the air above. Far away up on the hill they could hear the soundof singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, until they came tothe high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a fountain shimmering. Itwas lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell intoa basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the south side ofthe lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; its great smooth bole

gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered, until its first branches, farabove, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it abroad white ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. They sprangup as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they were tall and clad ingrey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white cloaks.
'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,' said Haldir. `It is their wish thatyou should ascend and speak with them.'
One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and it wasanswered three times from far above. `I will go first,' said Haldir. 'LetFrodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they wish. Itis a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs, but you mayrest upon the way.'
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, someon another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so that the ladder passedthrough them. At a great height above the ground he came to a wide _talan_,
like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that almostit would have served for a hall of Men upon the earth. He entered behindHaldir, and found that he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the midst ofwhich grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its crown, andyet making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was filled with a soft light; its walls were green and silverand its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two chairs beneath thebole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat, side by side,
Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to greet their guests, after the mannerof Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall they were, andthe Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. Theywere clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, and thehair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; but no sign of agewas upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes; for these were keenas lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the wells of deep memory.
Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his owntongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face.
`Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire! ' said Celeborn. `When allhave come we will speak together.'
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they entered.
`Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight and thirty years ofthe world outside since you came to this land; and those years lie heavy onyou. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for awhile! '
'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither fromthe North.'
`Welcome Gimli son of Gl车in! It is long indeed since we saw one ofDurin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our long law. May itbe a sign that though the world is now dark better days are at hand, and thatfriendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked at themagain. 'Here there are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said themessages. But maybe there has been some change of counsel that we have notheard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this yearthe shadows have grown longer.'
`Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speakingfor the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman'swont. `Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass theborders of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to speakwith him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless he comes within thefences of Lothl车rien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet andof his mind are hidden from me.'
'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He remained inMoria and did not escape.'

At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief andamazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that havebeen spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir.
`Why has nothing of this been told to me before? ' he asked in the Elventongue.
'We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,' said Legolas.
`At first we were weary and danger was too close behind and afterwards wealmost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness on the fair pathsof L车rien.'
`Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,' said Frodo.
'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escapeseemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.'
'Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn:
Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of Caradhras,
and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and his book, and thefight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow bridge, and thecoming of the Terror. 'An evil of the Ancient World it seemed, such as I havenever seen before,' said Aragorn. `It was both a shadow and a flame, strongand terrible.'
'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; `of all elf-banes the mostdeadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.'
`Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams I sawDurin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes.
'Alas! ' said Celeborn. `We long have feared that under Caradhras aterror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this evil inMoria again, I would have forbidden you to pass the northern borders, you andall that went with you. And if it were possible, one would say that at thelast Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net ofMoria.'
`He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely.
`Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him
knew not his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may bewith the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repent of your welcome tothe Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long and far from Lothl车rien, who ofthe Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish tolook upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
'Dark is the water of Kheled-zaram, and cold are the springs of Kibilnala,
and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-d.m in Elder Days beforethe fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.' She looked upon Gimli, who satglowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the names given inhis own ancient tongue, looked up and met her eyes; and it seemed to him thathe looked suddenly into the heart of an enemy and saw there love andunderstanding. Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: `Yet more fair isthe living land of L车rien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all the jewels thatlie beneath the earth! '
There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. `I did not know thatyour plight was so evil,' he said. `Let Gimli forget my harsh words: I spokein the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can to aid you, each according tohis wish and need, but especially that one of the little folk who bears theburden.'
'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. `But wewill not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe,
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.
For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of Middle-
earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings. He has dwelt in theWest since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; forere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, andtogether through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat.
'I it was who first summoned the White Council. And if my designs had not

gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then mayhapthings would have gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I will notgive you counsel, saying do this, or do that. For not in doing or contriving,
nor in choosing between this course and another, can I avail; but only inknowing what was and is, and in part also what shall be. But this I will sayto you: your Quest stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and itwill fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the Company istrue.'
And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence lookedsearchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and Aragorn could longendure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head.
At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and she smiled.
`Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight you shall sleep inpeace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have beenquestioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.
`Go now! ' said Celeborn. `You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even
if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have refuge in this City,
until you were healed and refreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will not speakof your further road for a while.'
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to the satisfaction ofthe hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion among the trees near thefountain, and in it they laid soft couches; then speaking words of peace withfair elvish voices they left them. For a little while the travellers talked oftheir night before in the tree-tops, and of their day's journey, and of theLord and Lady; for they had not yet the heart to look further back.
`What did you blush for, Sam? ' said Pippin. `You soon broke down. Anyonewould have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing worsethan a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.'
`I never thought no such thing,' answered Sam, in no mood for jest. 'Ifyou want to know, I felt as if I hadn't got nothing on, and I didn't like it.
She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she gaveme the chance of flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with-witha bit of garden of my own.'
`That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost exactly what I felt myself; only,
only well, I don't think I'II say any more,' he ended lamely.
All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he wasoffered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and somethingthat he greatly desired: clear before his mind it lay, and to get it he hadonly to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest and the war againstSauron to others.
`And it seemed to me, too,' said Gimli, `that my choice would remainsecret and known only to myself.'
'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,' said Boromir. `Maybe it was only atest, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own good purpose; butalmost I should have said that she was tempting us, and offering what shepretended to have the power to give. It need not be said that I refused tolisten. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.' But what he thoughtthat the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him withquestions. `She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,' he said.
`Yes,' said Frodo; `but whatever came into my mind then I will keepthere.'
`Well, have a care! ' said Boromir. `I do not feel too sure of thisElvish Lady and her purposes.'
`Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You knownot what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil, unless a man bringit hither himself. Then let him beware! But tonight I shall sleep without fearfor the first time since I left Rivendell. And may I sleep deep, and forgetfor a while my grief! I am weary in body and in heart.' He cast himself downupon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep.

The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbed theirslumber. When they woke they found that the light of day was broad upon thelawn before the pavilion. and the fountain rose and fell glittering in thesun.
They remained some days in Lothl车rien, so far as they could tell orremember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear, save for agentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all things fresh andclean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early spring, yet they feltabout them the deep and thoughtful quiet of winter. It seemed to them thatthey did little but eat and drink and rest, and walk among the trees; and itwas enough.
They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little speechwith the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the Westron tongue.
Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone back again to the fences of theNorth, where great watch was now kept since the tidings of Moria that theCompany had brought. Legolas was away much among the Galadhrim, and after thefirst night he did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned toeat and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went abroad in
the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, andall that each had known and seen of him came clear before their minds. As theywere healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew morekeen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they weremaking songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name among thesweet sad words that they could not understand.
_Mithrandir, Mithrandir_ sang the Elves, _O Pilgrim Grey!_For so theyloved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Company, he would not interpretthe songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for him thegrief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song.
It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into halting words. Hewas seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had listened andhad not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things thatothers had made before him. But now as he sat beside the fountain in L车rien
and heard about him the voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a songthat seemed fair to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatchesremained, faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with bird on bough and beast in den,
in their own secret tongues he spoke.
A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;
an old man in a battered hat

who leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both defied;
his staff was broken on the stone,
in Khazad-d.m his wisdom died.
`Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam.
'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.'
'Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you'll say a wordabout his fireworks,' said Sam. `Something like this:
The finest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of flowers.
Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.'
`No, I'll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I can'ttalk of it any more. I can't bear to think of bringing the news to him.'
One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool twilight.
Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the shadow of parting hadfallen: he knew somehow that the time was very near when he must leaveLothl车rien.
`What do you think of Elves now, Sam? ' he said. `I asked you the samequestion once before-it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more ofthem since then.'
'I have indeed! ' said Sam. 'And I reckon there's Elves and Elves.
They're all elvish enough, but they're not all the same. Now these folk aren'twanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us: they seem tobelong here, more even than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they've made theland, or the land's made them, it's hard to say, if you take my meaning. It'swonderfully quiet here. Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to wantit to. If there's any magic about, it's right down deep, where I can't lay myhands on it, in a manner of speaking.'
'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo.
'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't see nobody working it. No fireworks likepoor Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don't see nothing of the Lord and Ladyin all these days. I fancy now that _she_ could do some wonderful things, ifshe had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '
'I wouldn't,' said Frodo. `I am content. And I don't miss Gandalf'sfireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.'
`You're right,' said Sam. `And don't think I'm finding fault. I've oftenwanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but I'venever heard of a better land than this. It's like being at home and on aholiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All thesame, I'm beginning to feel that if we've got to go on, then we'd best get itover.
'_It's the job that's never started as takes longest to finish_, as myold gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk can do much more tohelp us, magic or no. It's when we leave this land that we shall miss Gandalfworse, I'm thinking.'
'I am afraid that's only too true, Sam,' said Frodo. `Yet I hope verymuch that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.'
Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their words, theLady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath thetrees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them toward the southern slopes of the hill ofCaras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they came into anenclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay open to the sky. The evening

star had risen and was shining with white fire above the western woods. Down along flight of steps the Lady went into a deep green hollow, through which ranmurmuring the silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At thebottom, upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, stood a basin ofsilver. wide and shallow, and beside it stood a silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel filled the basin to the brim, andbreathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke. `Here is theMirror of Galadriel,' she said. 'I have brought you here so that you may lookin it, if you will.'
The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady besidehim was tall and pale. 'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? ' askedFrodo, filled with awe.
`Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she answered, `and tosome I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will also show thingsunbidden, and those are often stranger and more profitable than things whichwe wish to behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror free to work, Icannot tell. For it shows things that were, and things that are, things thatyet may be. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest cannot always tell.
Do you wish to look? '
Frodo did not answer.
`And you? ' she said, turning to Sam. 'For this is what your folk wouldcall magic. I believe; though I do not understand clearly what they mean; andthey seem also to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy. But this, ifyou will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you wished to seeElf-magic? '
'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. `I'llhave a peep, Lady, if you're willing.'
`And I'd not mind a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in anaside to Frodo. 'It seems a terrible long time that I've been away. But there,
like as not I'll only see the stars, or something that I won't understand.'
'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. `But come, you shalllook and see what you may. Do not touch the water! '
Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin. Thewater looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it.
`There's only stars, as I thought,' he said. Then he gave a low gasp, forthe stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn, the Mirror grewgrey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches of trees werewaving and tossing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mind what itwas that he saw, the light faded; and now he thought he saw Frodo with a paleface lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himselfgoing along a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came tohim suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, but what it was hedid not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went back, and he saw thetrees again. But this time they were not so close, and he could see what wasgoing on: they were not waving in the wind, they were falling, crashing to theground.
`Hi!' cried Sam in an outraged voice. 'There's that Ted Sandyman a-
cutting down trees as he shouldn't. They didn't ought to be felled: it's thatavenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I wish I could get atTed, and I'd fell _him_!'
But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large red-brickbuilding was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk were busily atwork. There was a tall red chimney nearby. Black smoke seemed to cloud thesurface of the Mirror.
'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew whathe was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.' Then suddenly Sam gave acry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. `I must go home.
They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the poor old gaffer going down theHill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! '
'You cannot go home alone,' said the Lady. 'You did not wish to go home

without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and yet you knew thatevil things might well be happening in the Shire. Remember that the Mirrorshows many things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some never come to be,
unless those that behold the visions turn aside from their path to preventthem. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds.'
Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. `I wish I had nevercome here, and I don't want to see no more magic,' he said and fell silent.
After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with tears. `No, I'llgo home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,' he said. `But I hopeI do get back some day. If what I've seen turns out true, somebody's going tocatch it hot! '
`Do you now wish to look, Frodo? ' said the Lady Galadriel. `You did notwish to see Elf-magic and were content.'
`Do you advise me to look? ' asked Frodo.
'No,' she said. `I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am not acounsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you see be fair or evil,
that may be profitable, and yet it may not. Seeing is both good and perilous.
Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage and wisdom enough for the venture,
or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will! '
`I will look,' said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent overthe dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit land. Mountains
loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A long grey road wound backout of sight. Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint and small atfirst, but growing larger and clearer as it approached. Suddenly Frodorealized that it reminded him of Gandalf. He almost called aloud the wizard's
name, and then he saw that the figure was clothed not in grey but in white, ina white that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a whitestaff. The head was so bowed that he could see no face, and presently thefigure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the Mirror'sview. Doubt came into Frodo's mind: was this a vision of Gandalf on one of his
many lonely journeys long ago, or was it Saruman?
The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught aglimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was litteredwith disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed thatFrodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had becomeinvolved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen beforebut knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in a greatstorm. Then he saw against the Sun, sinking blood-red into a wrack of clouds,
the black outline of a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of the West.
Then a wide river flowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress withseven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it was morningagain, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing the emblem of awhite tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of fire and battle arose, and againthe sun went down in a burning red that faded into a grey mist; and into themist a small ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It vanished, and Frodosighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole hadopened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the blackabyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew. until it filled nearly allthe Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to cry out orto withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but was itself glazed,
yellow as a cat's, watchful and intent, and the black slit of its pupil openedon a pit, a window into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knewwith certainty and horror that among the many things that it sought he himselfwas one. But he also knew that it could not see him-not yet, not unless hewilled it. The Ring that hung upon its chain about his neck grew heavy,
heavier than a great stone, and his head was dragged downwards. The Mirrorseemed to be growing hot and curls of steam were rising from the water. He was

slipping forward.
`Do not touch the water!' said the Lady Galadriel softly. The visionfaded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling in thesilver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady.
`I know what it was that you last saw,' she said; `for that is also in mymind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing amid the trees,
nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this land of Lothl车rienmaintained and defended against its Enemy. I say to you, Frodo, that even as Ispeak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or all of his mindthat concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my thought. Butstill the door is closed! '
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the Eastin a gesture of rejection and denial. E.rendil, the Evening Star, most belovedof the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of theElven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring abouther finger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with silver light, and awhite stone in it twinkled as if the Even-star had come down to rest upon herhand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that heunderstood.
`Yes,' she said, divining his thought, `it is not permitted to speak ofit, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the Ring-bearer,
and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land of L车rien upon thefinger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains. This is Nenya, the Ring ofAdamant, and I am its keeper.
`He suspects, but he does not know 每 not yet. Do you not see nowwherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom? For if you fail, thenwe are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then our power isdiminished, and Lothl车rien will fade, and the tides of Time will sweep itaway. We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell andcave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.'
Frodo bent his head. `And what do you wish? ' he said at last.
`That what should be shall be,' she answered. `The love of the Elves fortheir land and their works is deeper than the deeps of the Sea, and theirregret is undying and cannot ever wholly be assuaged. Yet they will cast allaway rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him now. For the fate ofLothl车rien you are not answerable but only for the doing of your own task. YetI could wish, were it of any avail, that the One Ring had never been wrought,
or had remained for ever lost.'
'You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,' said Frodo. `I willgive you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for me.'
Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. `Wise the Lady Galadriel maybe,' she said, `yet here she has met her match in courtesy. Gently are yourevenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to seewith a keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to ask whatyou offer. For many long years I had pondered what I might do, should theGreat Ring come into my hands, and behold! it was brought within my grasp. Theevil that was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himselfstands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set to the credit of
his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
`And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! In place ofthe Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be dark, but beautifuland terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the Sun and theSnow upon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the Lightning! Stronger thanthe foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! '
She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued agreat light that illuminated her alone and left all else dark. She stoodbefore Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful beyondenduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the lightfaded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was shrunken: a slenderelf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad.

'I pass the test,' she said. `I will diminish, and go into the West andremain Galadriel.'
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again.
`Let us return! ' she said. `In the morning you must depart for now we havechosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.'
`I would ask one thing before we go,' said Frodo, `a thing which I oftenmeant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear the One Ring: whycannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that wear them? '
`You have not tried,' she said. `Only thrice have you set the Ring uponyour finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try! It would destroyyou. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power according to themeasure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need tobecome far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yeteven so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen thatwhich is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thoughtmore clearly than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him thatholds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize the ring uponmy finger? Did you see my ring? ' she asked turning again to Sam.
'No, Lady,' he answered. `To tell you the truth, I wondered what you weretalking about. I saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon myspeaking out, I think my master was right. I wish you'd take his Ring. You'dput things to rights. You'd stop them digging up the gaffer and turning himadrift. You'd make some folk pay for their dirty work.'
`I would,' she said. `That is how it would begin. But it would not stopwith that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!'
_Chapter 8_
Farewell to L车rien
That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, andthere the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn spokeof their departure.
`Now is the time,' he said, `when those who wish to continue the Questmust harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no longer wish to goforward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none can besure of peace. For we are come now to the edge of doom. Here those who wishmay await the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of the world lie openagain. or we summon them to the last need of L车rien. Then they may return totheir own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in battle.'
There was a silence. `They all resolved to go forward,' said Galadriellooking in their eyes.
`As for me,' said Boromir, `my way home lies onward and not back.'
`That is true,' said Celeborn, `but is all this Company going with you toMinas Tirith? '
`We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn. 'Beyond Lothl车rien I donot know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had
any clear purpose.'
`Maybe not,' said Celeborn, `yet when you leave this land, you can nolonger forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it cannot be crossedby travellers with baggage between L车rien and Gondor, save by boat. And arenot the bridges of Osgiliath broken down and all the landings held now by the
Enemy?
`On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon thisside, upon the west; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of theRiver, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take? '
`If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way toMinas Tirith,' answered Boromir. `But I am not the leader of the Company.' Theothers said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled.
`I see that you do not yet know what to do,' said Celeborn. `It is not my

part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There are some among youwho can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk know the swift Forest River; andBoromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.'
`And one Hobbit! ' cried Merry. `Not all of us look on boats as wildhorses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.'
`That is well,' said Celeborn. `Then I will furnish your Company withboats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water, there areplaces where you will be forced to carry them. You will come to the rapids ofSarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the Riverthunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils. Boats may makeyour journey less toilsome for a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: inthe end you must leave them and the River, and turn west-or east.'
Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted himmuch, not least because there would now be no need to decide his course forsome days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, itseemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to plodforward with bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still thoughtboats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that he hadsurvived made him think better of them.
`All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before noontomorrow,' said Celeborn. 'I will send my people to you in the morning to helpyou make ready for the journey. Now we will wish you all a fair night anduntroubled sleep.'
'Good night, my friends! ' said Galadriel. 'Sleep in peace! Do nottrouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight. Maybe the pathsthat you each shall tread are already laid before your feet, though you do notsee them. Good night! '
The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion. Legolaswent with them, for this was to be their last night in Lothl车rien, and inspite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together.
For a long time they debated what they should do, and how it would bebest to attempt the fulfilling of their purpose with the Ring: but they cameto no decision. It was plain that most of them desired to go first to MinasTirith, and to escape at least for a while from the terror of the Enemy. Theywould have been willing to follow a leader over the River and into the shadowof Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.
His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go withBoromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that themessage of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last whenthe heir of Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for the mastery.
But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid on him; and he knew that hecould not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to go withBoromir. And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to Frodo, saveto walk blindly with him into the darkness?
`I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,' saidBoromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his eyes fixedon Frodo, as if he was trying to read the Halfling's thoughts. At length hespoke again, softly, as if he was debating with himself. `If you wish only todestroy the Ring,' he said, `then there is little use in war and weapons; andthe Men of Minas Tirith cannot help. But if you wish to destroy the armedmight of the Dark Lord, then it is folly to go without force into his domain;
and folly to throw away.' He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware thathe was speaking his thoughts aloud. `It would be folly to throw lives away, Imean,' he ended. `It is a choice between defending a strong place and walkingopenly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I see it.'
Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir's glance, and he lookedhard at him. Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final words. Itwould be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said somethinglike this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction of Elrond.
Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no

sign that he had heeded Boromir's words. And so their debate ended. Merry andPippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The night was growing old.
In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slender goods, Elvesthat could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts of foodand clothing for the journey. The food was mostly in the form of very thincakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside, and insidewas the colour of cream. Gimli took up one of the cakes and looked at it witha doubtful eye.
`_Cram_,' he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp corner andnibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and he ate all the rest of thecake with relish.
`No more, no more!' cried the Elves laughing. `You have eaten enoughalready for a long day's march.'
`I thought it was only a kind of _cram_, such as the Dale-men make forjourneys in the wild,' said the Dwarf.
`So it is,' they answered. `But we call it _lembas_ or waybread, and itis more strengthening than any food made by Men, and it is more pleasant than_cram_, by all accounts.'
`Indeed it is,' said Gimli. 'Why it is better than the honey-cakes of theBeornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the best bakersthat I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes totravellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! '
'All the same, we bid you spare the food,' they said. 'Eat little at atime, and only at need. For these things are given to serve you when all elsefails. The cakes will keep sweet for many many days, if they are unbroken andleft in their leaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will keep atraveller on his feet for a day of long labour, even if he be one of the tallMen of Minas Tirith.'
The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Company the clothes theyhad brought. For each they had provided a hood and cloak, made according tohis size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim wove. It washard to say of what colour they were: grey with the hue of twilight under thetrees they seemed to be; and yet if they were moved, or set in another light,
they were green as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow fields by night, dusk-
silver as water under the stars. Each cloak was fastened about the neck with a
brooch like a green leaf veined with silver.
`Are these magic cloaks? ' asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder.
`I do not know what you mean by that,' answered the leader of the Elves.
`They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this land.
They are elvish robes certainly, if that is what you mean. Leaf and branch,
water and stone: they have the hue and beauty of all these things under thetwilight of L车rien that we love; for we put the thought of all that we loveinto all that we make. Yet they are garments, not armour, and they will notturn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are light to wear,
and warm enough or cool enough at need. And you will find them a great aid inkeeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you walk among the stonesor the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the Lady! For she herselfand her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have we clad strangers inthe garb of our own people.'
After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the lawn by thefountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a fair place, and it had becomelike home to them, though they could not count the days and nights that theyhad passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the white water in thesunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass of the glade.
Frodo greeted him with delight.
'I have returned from the Northern Fences,' said the Elf, `and I am sentnow to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of vapour and clouds ofsmoke, and the mountains are troubled. There are noises in the deeps of theearth. If any of you had thought of returning northwards to your homes, youwould not have been able to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes

south.'
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but inthe trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They themselveswent silently. At last Haldir led them down the southward slopes of the hill,
and they came again to the great gate hung with lamps, and to the whitebridge; and so they passed out and left the city of the Elves. Then theyturned away from the paved road and took a path that went off into a deepthicket of mallorn-trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands ofsilver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and eastwards, towards theshores of the River.
They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they came on ahigh green wall. Passing through an opening they came suddenly out of thetrees. Before them lay a long lawn of shining grass, studded with golden_elanor_ that glinted in the sun. The lawn ran out into a narrow tonguebetween bright margins: on the right and west the Silverlode flowedglittering; on the left and east the Great River rolled its broad waters, deepand dark. On the further shores the woodlands still marched on southwards as
far as the eye could see, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallornlifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of L车rien.
On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting ofthe streams, there was a hythe of white stones and white wood. By it weremoored many boats and barges. Some were brightly painted, and shone withsilver and gold and green, but most were either white or grey. Three smallgrey boats had been made ready for the travellers, and in these the Elvesstowed their goods. And they added also coils of rope, three to each boat.
Slender they looked, but strong, silken to the touch, grey of hue like theelven-cloaks.
`What are these? ' asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the greensward.
`Ropes indeed! ' answered an Elf from the boats. 'Never travel farwithout a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are these.
They may be a help in many needs.'
'You don't need to tell me that! ' said Sam. `I came without any and I'vebeen worried ever since. But I was wondering what these were made of, knowinga bit about rope-making: it's in the family as you might say.'
`They are made of _hithlain_,' said the Elf, `but there is no time now toinstruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this craftdelighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas! unless you shouldat some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it serveyou well! '
`Come! ' said Haldir. `All is now ready for you. Enter the boats! Buttake care at first! '
'Heed the words! ' said the other Elves. 'These boats are light-built,
and they are crafty and unlike the boats of other folk. They will not sink,
lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be wise ifyou accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out, here where there is alanding-place, before you set off downstream.'
The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in oneboat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the third were Legolas andGimli, who had now become fast friends. In this last boat most of the goodsand packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steered with short-handledpaddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready Aragorn led themon a trial up the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forwardslowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking back wistfullyto the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water dazzled his eyes. As theypassed beyond the green field of the Tongue, the trees drew down to theriver's brink. Here and there golden leaves tossed and floated on the ripplingstream. The air was very bright and still, and there was a silence, except forthe high distant song of larks.
They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly downthe stream toward them, they saw a swan of great size. The water rippled on

either side of the white breast beneath its curving neck. Its beak shone likeburnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its hugewhite wings were half lifted. A music came down the river as it drew nearer;
and suddenly they perceived that it was a ship, wrought and carved with elvenskill
in the likeness of a bird. Two elves clad in white steered it with black
paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stoodGaladriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her hair, and inher hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the sound of hervoice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,
In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.
There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.
O L车rien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away.
O L车rien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Lady endedher song and greeted them. `We have come to bid you our last farewell,' shesaid, `and to speed you with blessings from our land.'
`Though you have been our guests,' said Celeborn, `you have not yet eatenwith us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between theflowing waters that will bear you far from L车rien.'
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats andfollowed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the green grass the partingfeast was held; but Frodo ate and drank little, heeding only the beauty of theLady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible, nor filled withhidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later days Elves stillat times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision of that which hasalready been left far behind by the flowing streams of Time.
After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celeborn spoke tothem again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to thewoods beyond the Tongue.
`As you go down the water,' he said, `you will find that the trees willfail, and you will come to a barren country. There the River flows in stonyvale amid high moors, until at last after many leagues it comes to the tallisland of the Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its armsabout the steep shores of the isle, and falls then with a great noise andsmoke over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it iscalled in your tongue. That is a wide region of sluggish fen where the streambecomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by many mouthsfrom the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that stream, on this side of theGreat River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills of the EmynMuil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over the DeadMarshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of Mordor.
'Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do well toleave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds the
marshes. Yet they should not go too far up that stream, nor risk becomingentangled in the Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is now littleknown. But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need this warning.'
'Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. `Butwhat I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives' tales, such as we

tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now to us so far awaythat fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay upon the borders of ourrealm; but it is now many lives of men since any of us visited it, to prove ordisprove the legends that have come down from distant years.
`I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never crossed itnorthwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap bythe skirts of the White Mountains, and crossed the Isen and the Greyflood intoNortherland. A long and wearisome journey. Four hundred leagues I reckoned it,
and it took me many months; for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at the fording ofthe Greyflood. After that journey, and the road I have trodden with thisCompany, I do not much doubt that I shall find a way through Rohan, andFangorn too, if need be.'
`Then I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lorethat has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance that old wiveskeep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.'
Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from one of hermaidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
'Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,' she said. `Drink, Lord ofthe Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad though night must follow noon,
and already our evening draweth nigh.'
Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink andfarewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on thegrass, and chairs were set for her and for Celeborn. Her maidens stood silentabout her, and a while she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke again.
'We have drunk the cup of parting,' she said, `and the shadows fallbetween us. But before you go, I have brought in my ship gifts which the Lordand Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory of Lothl车rien.' Then shecalled to each in turn.
`Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of yourCompany,' she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made tofit his sword. It was overlaid with a tracery of flowers and leaves wrought ofsilver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of many gems thename And~ril and the lineage of the sword.
`The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or broken
even in defeat,' she said. `But is there aught else that you desire of me atour parting? For darkness will flow between us, and it may be that we shallnot meet again, unless it be far hence upon a road that has no returning.'
And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, you know all my desire, and long held inkeeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even ifyou would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.'
`Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,' said Galadriel; `for it wasleft in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.' Thenshe lifted from her lap a great stone of a clear green, set in a silver broochthat was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with outspread wings; and as sheheld it up the gem flashed like the sun shining through the leaves of spring.
`This stone I gave to Celebr赤an my daughter, and she to hers; and now it comesto you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name that was foretold foryou, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! '
Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, andthose who saw him wondered; for they had not marked before how tall and kinglyhe stood, and it seemed to them that many years of toil had fallen from hisshoulders. `For the gifts that you have given me I thank you,' he said, 'OLady of L车rien of whom were sprung Celebr赤an and Arwen Evenstar. What praisecould I say more? '
The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him shegave a belt of gold; and to Merry and Pippin she gave small silver belts, eachwith a clasp wrought like a golden flower. To Legolas she gave a bow such asthe Galadhrim used, longer and stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, and strungwith a string of elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.
`For you little gardener and lover of trees,' she said to Sam, `I have

only a small gift.' She put into his hand a little box of plain grey wood,
unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid. `Here is set G forGaladriel,' she said; `but also it may stand for garden in your tongue. Inthis box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel hasstill to bestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nor defend youagainst any peril; but if you keep it and see your home again at last, thenperhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all barren and laid waste,
there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, ifyou sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and catch aglimpse far off of L车rien, that you have seen only in our winter. For ourspring and our summer are gone by, and they will never be seen on earth againsave in memory.'
Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible, as he clutchedthe box and bowed as well as he could.
`And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? ' said Galadriel turningto Gimli.
`None, Lady,' answered Gimli. `It is enough for me to have seen the Ladyof the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.'
`Hear all ye Elves! ' she cried to those about her. `Let none say againthat Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli son of Gl车in, youdesire something that I could give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be theonly guest without a gift.'
`There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,' said Gimli, bowing low andstammering. `Nothing, unless it might be 每 unless it is permitted to ask, nay,
to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the gold of the earth asthe stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But youcommanded me to name my desire.'
The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn gazed atthe Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. 'It is said that the skill of theDwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues ' she said; `yet thatis not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to me a request so bold and yetso courteous. And how shall I refuse, since I commanded him to speak? But tellme, what would you do with such a gift? '
`Treasure it, Lady,' he answered, `in memory of your words to me at ourfirst meeting. And if ever I return to the smithies of my home, it shall beset in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house, and a pledge ofgood will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.'
Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut off three goldenhairs, and laid them in Gimli's hand. `These words shall go with the gift,'
she said. `I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now vain: on the one handlies darkness, and on the other only hope. But if hope should not fail, then Isay to you, Gimli son of Gl车in, that your hands shall flow with gold, and yetover you gold shall have no dominion.
`And you, Ring-bearer,' she said, turning to Frodo. `I come to you lastwho are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.' She held up asmall crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white lightsprang from her hand. 'In this phial,' she said, `is caught the light ofE.rendil's star, set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine stillbrighter when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark places,
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! '
Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them, he sawher again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no longer terrible.
He bowed, but found no words to say.
Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the hythe. A yellownoon lay on the green land of the Tongue, and the water glittered with silver.
All at last was made ready. The Company took their places in the boats asbefore. Crying farewell, the Elves of L车rien with long grey poles thrust themout into the flowing stream, and the rippling waters bore them slowly away.
The travellers sat still without moving or speaking. On the green bank near tothe very point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As

they passed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowly floating awayfrom them. For so it seemed to them: L车rien was slipping backward, like abright ship masted with enchanted trees, sailing on to forgotten shores, whilethey sat helpless upon the margin of the grey and leafless world.
Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of theGreat River, and their boats turned and began to speed southwards. Soon thewhite form of the Lady was small and distant. She shone like a window of glassupon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from amountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then it seemed to Frodothat she lifted her arms in a final farewell, and far but piercing-clear onthe following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she sang inthe ancient tongue of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not understand thewords: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him.
Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained graven in his memory,
and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well as he could: the language wasthat of Elven-song and spoke of things little known on Middle-earth.
Ai! lauri. lantar lassi s~rinen,
Y谷ni ~n车tim. ve r芍mar aldaron!
Y谷ni ve lint. yuldar av芍nier
mi oromardi lisse-miruv车reva
And~n. pella, Vardo tellumar
nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni
车maryo airet芍ri-l赤rinen.
S赤 man i yulma nin enquantuva?
An s赤 Tintall. Varda Oioloss.o
ve fanyar m芍ryat Elent芍ri ortan.
ar ily. tier undul芍v. lumbul.;
ar sindan车riello caita morni.
i falmalinnar imb. met, ar h赤si.
unt~pa Calaciryo m赤ri oial..
Si vanwa n芍, R车mello vanwa, Valimar!
Nam芍ri.! Nai hiruvaly. Valimar.
Nai ely. hiruva. Nam芍ri.!
`Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as thewings of trees! The long years have passed like swift draughts of the sweetmead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda whereinthe stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who now shallrefill the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda, the Queen of the Stars,
from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all paths aredrowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foamingwaves between us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. Now lost,
lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou shalt findValimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it. Farewell! ' Varda is the name of thatLady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth.
Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks rose upon eitherside, and the light of L车rien was hidden. To that fair land Frodo never came
again.
The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the sun was beforethem, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were filled with tears. Gimli weptopenly.
`I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,' he said to Legolashis companion. `Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless it be hergift.' He put his hand to his breast.
`Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little did I know wherethe chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we could not foresee whatwe might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger that I feared,

and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, had I known the dangerof light and joy. Now I have taken my worst wound in this parting, even if Iwere to go this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Gl车in!
'
`Nay! ' said Legolas. `Alas for us all! And for all that walk the worldin these after-days. For such is the way of it: to find and lose, as it seemsto those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, Gimlison of Gl车in: for your loss you suffer of your own free will, and you mighthave chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken your companions, and theleast reward that you shall have is that the memory of Lothl车rien shall remainever clear and unstained in your heart, and shall neither fade nor growstale.'
`Maybe,' said Gimli; `and I thank you for your words. True wordsdoubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is not what the heart desires.
That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zaram. Or so says the heart ofGimli the Dwarf. Elves may see things otherwise. Indeed I have heard that forthem memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. Not so forDwarves.
'But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the
water with all this baggage, and the Great River is swift. I do not wish todrown my grief in cold water.' He took up a paddle, and steered towards thewestern bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already moved out ofthe middle stream.
So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying waters,
borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they couldnot see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died away and the Riverflowed without a sound. No voice of bird broke the silence. The sun grew mistyas the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky like a high white pearl.
Then it faded into the West, and dusk came early, followed by a grey andstarless night. Far into the dark quiet hours they floated on, guiding theirboats under the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees passedby like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots through the mist downinto the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and listened to the faintlap and gurgle of the River fretting among the tree-roots and driftwood nearthe shore, until his head nodded and he fell into an uneasy sleep.
The Great River_Chapter 9_
Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped, undertall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west bank ofthe Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night away, and the grey of morningwas dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire near athand.
They started again before the day was broad. Not that most of the Companywere eager to hurry southwards: they were content that the decision, whichthey must make at latest when they came to Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, stilllay some days ahead; and they let the River bear them on at its own pace,
having no desire to hasten towards the perils that lay beyond, whichevercourse they took in the end. Aragorn let them drift with the stream as theywished, husbanding their strength against weariness to come. But he insistedthat at least they should start early each day and journey on far into theevening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing, and he feared thatthe Dark Lord had not been idle while they lingered in L车rien.
Nonetheless they saw no sign of an enemy that day, nor the next. The dullgrey hours passed without event. As the third day of their voyage wore on thelands changed slowly: the trees thinned and then failed altogether. On theeastern bank to their left they saw long formless slopes stretching up andaway toward the sky; brown and withered they looked, as if fire had passed

over them, leaving no living blade of green: an unfriendly waste without evena broken tree or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to theBrown Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern Mirkwood and thehills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed of the Enemy hadso blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was flat,
and in many places green with wide plains of grass. On this side of the Riverthey passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all view to thewest, as the little boats went rustling by along their fluttering borders.
Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in the light cold airs, hissingsoftly and sadly. Here and there through openings Frodo could catch suddenglimpses of rolling meads, and far beyond them hills in the sunset, and awayon the edge of sight a dark line, where marched the southernmost ranks of theMisty Mountains.
There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of these therewere many: small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds, but they were seldomseen. Once or twice the travellers heard the rush and whine of swan-wings, andlooking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky.
`Swans! ' said Sam. `And mighty big ones too! '
`Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and they are black swans.'
`How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! ' said Frodo. `Ialways imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer and merrier, untilwinter was left behind for ever.'
'But we have not journeyed far south yet,' answered Aragorn. `It is stillwinter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world is cold until the suddenspring, and we may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay of Belfalas,
to which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would be but for theEnemy. But here we are not above sixty leagues, I guess, south of theSouthfarthing away in your Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You arelooking now south-west across the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan theland of the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlightthat runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River. That is the northboundary of Rohan; and of old all that lay between Limlight and the WhiteMountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and pleasant land, and itsgrass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River orride often to its shores. Anduin is wide, yet the orcs can shoot their arrowsfar across the stream; and of late, it is said, they have dared to cross thewater and raid the herds and studs of Rohan.'
Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed hostilebefore, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers; now he wishedthat the trees were still there. He felt that the Company was too naked,
afloat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless lands, and on a riverthat was the frontier of war.
In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily southwards, thisfeeling of insecurity grew on all the Company. For a whole day they took totheir paddles and hastened forward. The banks slid by. Soon the Riverbroadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, andthere were gravel-shoals in the water, so that careful steering was needed.
The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air from theEast. On the other side the meads had become rolling downs of withered grassamidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of the lawns andfountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothl车rien. There was littlespeech and no laughter in any of the boats. Each member of the Company wasbusy with his own thoughts.
The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer night insome northern glade amid the beech-woods; Gimli was fingering gold in hismind, and wondering if it were fit to be wrought into the housing of theLady's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for Boromirsat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessnessor doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close

behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught a queergleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo. Sam had long ago madeup his mind that, though boats were maybe not as dangerous as he had beenbrought up to believe, they were far more uncomfortable than even he hadimagined. He was cramped and miserable, having nothing to do but stare at thewinter-lands crawling by and the grey water on either side of him. Even whenthe paddles were in use they did not trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowedheads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and longedfor camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught hissight: at first he stared at it listlessly, then he sat up and rubbed hiseyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more.
That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank. Sam layrolled in blankets beside Frodo. `I had a funny dream an hour or two before westopped, Mr. Frodo,' he said. `Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny it wasanyway.'
`Well, what was it? ' said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle downuntil he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought ofanything to make me smile since we left Lothl车rien.'
`It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All wrong, if itwasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log witheyes! '
`The log's all right,' said Frodo. `There are many in the River. Butleave out the eyes! '
`That I won't,' said Sam. ` 'Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so tospeak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behindGimli's boat; but I didn't give much heed to it. Then it seemed as if the logwas slowly catching us up. And that was peculiar, as you might say, seeing aswe were all floating on the stream together. Just then I saw the eyes: twopale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the near end of the log. What'smore, it wasn't a log, for it had paddle-feet, like a swan's almost, only theyseemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water.
'That's when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning to give a shout,
if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head. For thewhatever-it-was was coming along fast now and getting close behind Gimli. Butwhether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether I came to mysenses, I don't know. When I looked again, it wasn't there. Yet I think Icaught a glimpse with the tail of-my eye, as the saying is, of something darkshooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn't see no more eyes though.
`I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said: and I said nomore just then. But I've been thinking since. and now I'm not so sure. What doyou make of it, Mr. Frodo? '
'I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in youreyes Sam, said Frodo, if this was the first time that those eyes had beenseen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached L车rien. And Isaw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir sawit too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the orcband?
'
`Ah,' said Sam. `I do; and I remember more too. I don't like my thoughts;
but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and all, Ifancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess. A nasty name. Gollum,
maybe? '
`Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,' said Frodo. `Ever sincethe night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and picked up ourtrail then; but I hoped that our stay in L车rien would throw him off the scentagain. The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods by theSilverlode, watching us start off! '
`That's about it,' said Sam. `And we'd better be a bit more watchfulourselves, or we'll feel some nasty fingers round our necks one of these

nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And that's what I was leading upto. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I cansleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.'
`I might,' said Frodo, `and I might say "luggage with eyes". You shallwatch; but only if you promise to wake me halfway towards morning, if nothinghappens before then.'
In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to find Sam shakinghim. `It's a shame to wake you,' whispered Sam, `but that's what you said.
There's nothing to tell, or not much. I thought I heard some soft plashing anda sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such queer sounds by ariver at night.'
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, and fought offhis sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing happened. Frodo wasjust yielding to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardlyvisible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand couldbe dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyesshone coldly as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at Frodoon the eyot. They were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo heard thesoft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its sheath, andfaced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut off. There was another hissand a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream into the night.
Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up`
'What is it? ' he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. `I feltsomething in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? '
`Gollum,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I guess.'
`Ah! ' said Aragorn. `So you know about our little footpad, do you? Hepadded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we took toboats, he has been lying on a log and paddling with hands and feet. I havetried to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, and asslippery as a fish. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, but he is tooclever a waterman.
`We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down now, and I willkeep watch for what is left of the night. I wish I could lay my hands on thewretch. We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have to try andlose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on his ownaccount, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.'
The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow again. Afterthat the Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw no more of Gollum whilethe voyage lasted. If he was still following, he was very wary and cunning. AtAragorn's bidding they paddled now for long spells, and the banks went swiftlyby. But they saw little of the country, for they journeyed mostly by night andtwilight, resting by day, and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this waythe time passed without event until the seventh day.
The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the East, but asevening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faintlight, yellow and pale green, opened under the grey shores of cloud. There thewhite rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes. Samlooked at it and puckered his brows.
The next day the country on either side began to change rapidly. Thebanks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they were passing through a hillyrocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakesof thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood lowcrumbling cliffs, and chimneys of grey weathered stone dark with ivy; andbeyond these again there rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen firs. Theywere drawing near to the grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southernmarch of Wilderland.
There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock-chimneys, and all dayhigh in the air flocks of birds had been circling, black against the pale sky.
As they lay in their camp that day Aragorn watched the flights doubtfully,
wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news of their voyage

was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, and theCompany was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a dark spotagainst the fading light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, nowflying on slowly southwards.
'What is that, Legolas? ' he asked, pointing to the northern sky. 'Is it,
as I think. an eagle? '
'Yes.' said Legolas. `It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what thatforebodes. It is far from the mountains.'
`We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn.
The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless; thegrey east wind had passed away. The thin crescent of the Moon had fallen earlyinto the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and though far away in theSouth there were great ranges of cloud that still shone faintly, in the Weststars glinted bright.
`Come! ' said Aragorn. `We will venture one more journey by night. We arecoming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have neverjourneyed by water in these parts before, not between here and the rapids ofSarn Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are still many milesahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks andstony eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddleswiftly.'
To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman. He lay forwardpeering into the gloom. The night grew dark, but the stars above werestrangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River. It wasclose on midnight, and they had been drifting for some while. hardly using thepaddles, when suddenly Sam cried out. Only a few yards ahead dark shapesloomed up in the stream and he heard the swirl of racing water. There was aswift current which swung left, towards the eastern shore where the channelwas clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now very close,
the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were thrust outfar into the stream like a ridge of teeth. The boats were all huddledtogether.
`Hoy there, Aragorn! ' shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped into theleader. `This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night! But no boat canlive in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.'
`Back, back! ' cried Aragorn. 'Turn! Turn if you can! ' He drove hispaddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round.
'I am out of my reckoning,' he said to Frodo. 'I did not know that we hadcome so far: Anduin flows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir must be close athand already.'
With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly brought them about;
but at first they could make only small headway against the current, and allthe time they were carried nearer and nearer to the eastern bank. Now dark andominous it loomed up in the night.
'All together, paddle! ' shouted Boromir. 'Paddle! Or we shall be drivenon the shoals.' Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath him grate uponstone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistledover them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the shoulders andhe lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell back.
foiled by his hidden coat of mail. Another passed through Aragorn's hood; anda third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry's hand.
Sam thought he could glimpse black figures running to and fro upon the longshingle-banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed very near.
`_Yrch!_' said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.
`Orcs! ' cried Gimli.
`Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.' said Sam to Frodo. `And a nice place tochoose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! '
They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a hand.

Every moment they expected to feel the bite of black-feathered arrows. Manywhined overhead or struck the water nearby; but there were no more hits. Itwas dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes of Orcs, and in the star-glimmerthey must have offered their cunning foes some mark, unless it was that thegrey cloaks Of L车rien and the grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeatedthe malice of the archers of Mordor.
Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was hard to be surethat they were indeed moving at all; but slowly the swirl of the water grewless, and the shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night. At last,
as far as they could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream againand had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting rocks. Thenhalf turning they thrust them with all their strength towards the westernshore. Under the shadow Of bushes leaning out over the water they halted anddrew breath.
Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had brought fromL车rien. Then he sprang ashore and climbed a few paces up the bank. Stringingthe bow and fitting an arrow he turned, peering back over the River into thedarkness. Across the water there were shrill cries, but nothing could be seen.
Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he gazed into thenight, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp whitestars that glittered in the black pools of the sky behind. But now rising andsailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending out darkoutriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the Company.
`_Elbereth Gilthoniel!_' sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even as he didso, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved far moreswiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped towards the Company,
blotting out all light as it approached. Soon it appeared as a great wingedcreature, blacker than the pits in the night. Fierce voices rose up to greetit from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running through him andclutching at his heart; there was a deadly cold, like the memory of an oldwound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly the great bow of L车rien sang. Shrill went the arrow from theelven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged shape swerved.
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing downinto the gloom of the eastern shore. The sky was clean again. There was atumult of many voices far away, cursing and wailing in the darkness, and thensilence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt their wayalong the water's edge for some distance, until they found a small shallowbay. A few low trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose asteep rocky bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the dawn: it wasuseless to attempt to move further by night. They made no camp and lit nofire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored close together.
'Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas! ' saidGimli, as he munched a wafer of _lembas_. 'That was a mighty shot in the dark,
my friend!'
'But who can say what it hit?' said Legolas.
'I cannot,' said Gimli. `But I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. Iliked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria 每 the
shadow of the Balrog,' he ended in a whisper.
'It was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill thathad come upon him. 'It was something colder. I think it was -' Then he pausedand fell silent.
'What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from his boat, as ifhe was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face.
`I think 每 No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. `Whatever it was, itsfall has dismayed our enemies.'
`So it seems,' said Aragorn. `Yet where they are, and how many, and whatthey will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless! Darkhides us now. But what the day will show who can tell? Have your weapons close

to hand! '
Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting on hisfingers, and looking up at the sky. `It's very strange,' he murmured. `TheMoon's the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it ought to be. But eitherit's out of its running, or I'm all wrong in my reckoning. You'll remember,
Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that tree: a weekfrom the full, I reckon. And we'd been a week on the way last night, when uppops a New Moon as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time inthe Elvish country.
`Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I seem toremember several more, but I would take my oath it was never a whole month.
Anyone would think that time did not count in there! '
`And perhaps that was the way of it,' said Frodo. `In that land, maybe,
we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was not, I think, untilSilverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned to the time that flows
through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't remember any moon, eithernew or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.'
Legolas stirred in his boat. `Nay, time does not tarry ever,' he said;
`but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the Elvesthe world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, becausethey themselves change little, and all else fleets by: it is a grief to them.
Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. Thepassing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the long long stream. Yetbeneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.'
`But the wearing is slow in L车rien,' said Frodo. `The power of the Ladyis on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras Galadhon, whereGaladriel wields the Elven-ring.'
'That should not have been said outside L车rien, not even to me,' saidAragorn. `Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost yourcount. There time flowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves. The old moon passed,
and a new moon waxed and waned in the world outside, while we tarried there.
And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter is nearly gone. Time flows on to aspring of little hope.'
The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again across thewater. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the changing of the weather.
The air grew warm and very still under the great moist clouds that had floatedup from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River over therocks of the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer. The twigs of the treesabove them began to drip.
When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft andsad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light, diffused and shadowless. There wasmist on the River, and white fog swathed the shore; the far bank could not beseen.
`I can't abide fog,' said Sam; `but this seems to be a lucky one. Nowperhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.'
`Perhaps so,' said Aragorn. `But it will be hard to find the path unlessthe fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are to passSarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.'
'I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River anyfurther,' said Boromir. `If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandonthese cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to theEntwash and cross into my own land.'
`We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, `but that isnot yet agreed. And such a course may be more perilous than it sounds. Thevale of Entwash is flat and fenny, and fog is a deadly peril there for thoseon foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is
at least a path that cannot be missed.'
`But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,' objected Boromir. `And even ifyou pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock, what willyou do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? '

`No! ' answered Aragorn. `Say rather that we will bear our boats by theancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take to the water again. Do you notknow, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seatupon Amon Hen, that were made in the days of the great kings? I at least havea mind to stand in that high place again, before I decide my further course.
There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.'
Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became plain thatFrodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave in. 'It is not the wayof the Men of Minas Tirith to desert their friends at need,' he said, `and youwill need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. To the tall isleI will go, but no further. There I shall turn to my home, alone if my help hasnot earned the reward of any companionship.'
The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little. It was decidedthat Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the shore, while theothers remained by the boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by which theycould carry both their boats and their baggage to the smoother water beyondthe Rapids.
`Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,' he said, `but that does notsay that we should come through Sarn Gebir alive. None have ever done so yet.
No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their greatdays their realm did not reach up Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; but there is aportage-way somewhere on the western shore, if I can find it. It cannot yethave perished; for light boats used to journey out of Wilderland down toOsgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs of Mordorbegan to multiply.'
'Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the Orcs prowlon the east-shore,' said Boromir. `If you go forward, peril will grow withevery mile, even if you find a path.'
`Peril lies ahead on every southward road,' answered Aragorn. `Wait forus one day. If we do not return in that time, you will know that evil hasindeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader and follow him as best youcan.'
It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb thesteep bank and vanish into the mists; but his fears proved groundless. Onlytwo or three hours had passed, and it was barely mid-day, when the shadowyshapes of the explorers appeared again.
`All is well,' said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. 'There is atrack, and it leads to a good landing that is still serviceable. The distanceis not great: the head of the Rapids is but half a mile below us, and they arelittle more than a mile long. Not far beyond them the stream becomes clear andsmooth again, though it runs swiftly. Our hardest task will be to get ourboats and baggage to the old portage-way. We have found it, but it lies wellback from the water-side here, and runs under the lee of a rock-wall, afurlong or more from the shore. We did not find where the northward landinglies. If it still remains, we must have passed it yesterday night. We mightlabour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I fear we must leave the Rivernow, and make for the portage-way as best we can from here.'
`That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,' said Boromir.
`Yet such as we are we will try it,' said Aragorn.
'Aye, we will,' said Gimli. `The legs of Men will lag on a rough road,
while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! '
The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods weretaken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was alevel space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. Theywere far less heavy than any had expected. Of what tree growing in the elvishcountry they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was tough and yetstrangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could carry their boat with ease alongthe flat. Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to lift and haulthem over the ground that the Company now had to cross. It sloped up away fromthe River, a tumbled waste of grey limestone-boulders, with many hidden holes

shrouded with weeds and bushes; there were thickets of brambles, and sheerdells; and here and there boggy pools fed by waters trickling from theterraces further inland.
One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while the others toiledand scrambled after them with the baggage. At last all was removed and laid onthe portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from sprawlingbriars and many fallen stones, they moved forward all together. Fog still hungin veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to their left mist shrouded theRiver: they could hear it rushing and foaming over the sharp shelves and stonyteeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they made the journey,
before all was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back to the water-side, ran gently down tothe shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been scooped in theriver-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling down from Sarn Gebiragainst a low pier of rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond itthe shore rose sheer into a grey cliff, and there was no further passage forthose on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closingin. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of theRapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts wereas gloomy as the dying day.
'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir.
`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonathby night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.'
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
`Let us rest as much as we can now,' said Aragorn. `Tomorrow we mustjourney by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, weshall have a good chance of slipping through, unseen by any eyes on theeastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: three hours offand one on guard.'
Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hourbefore dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog wasthinning. They kept as close as they could to the western side, and they couldsee the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls withtheir feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the clouds drew downlower, and it began to rain heavily. They drew the skin-covers over theirboats to prevent them from being flooded, and drifted on: little could be seenbefore them or about them through the grey falling curtains.
The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above grew lighter,
and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their draggled fringes trailed awaynorthward up the River. The fogs and mists were gone. Before the travellerslay a wide ravine, with great rocky sides to which clung, upon shelves and innarrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The channel grew narrower and the Riverswifter. Now they were speeding along with little hope of stopping or turning,
whatever they might meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, aroundthem the dark overshadowed River, and before them black, shutting out the sun,
the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no opening could be seen.
Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching:
like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they seemed. Tall and sheer andominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A narrow gap appearedbetween them, and the River swept the boats towards it.
`Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings! ' cried Aragorn. `Weshall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, and as far apart as you can!
Hold the middle of the stream! '
As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose like towers tomeet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey figures silent but threatening.
Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and fashioned: the craft and power ofold had wrought upon them, and still they preserved through the suns and rainsof forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which they had been hewn. Upongreat pedestals founded in the deep waters stood two great kings of stone:

still with blurred eyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. Theleft hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of warning; in eachright hand there was an axe; upon each head there was a crumbling helm andcrown. Great power and majesty they still wore, the silent wardens of a long-
vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon Frodo, and he cowered down, shuttinghis eyes and not daring to look up as the boat drew near. Even Boromir bowedhis head as the boats whirled by. frail and fleeting as little leaves, underthe enduring shadow of the sentinels of N~menor. So they passed into the darkchasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Faroff was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamedover them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front muttering andgroaning: `What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of thisboat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '
`Fear not! ' said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and sawStrider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no longer there.
In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding the boatwith skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was blowing inthe wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from exile to his ownland.
'Fear not! ' he said. `Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses ofIsildur and An芍rion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar, the Elfstoneson of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur's son heir of Elendil, hasnought to dread! '
Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: `Would thatGandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and the walls of my owncity! But whither now shall I go? '
The chasm was long and dark, and filled with the noise of wind andrushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat towards the west so that atfirst all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall gap of light before him,
ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, outinto a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky.
The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen Hithoel, fenced bysteep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but their heads were bare,
cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far southern end rose three peaks. Themidmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered from them, anisland in the waters, about which the flowing River flung pale shimmeringarms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the rollof thunder heard far away.
`Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak.
'Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills ofHearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there were high seatsupon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of man orbeast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere the shade of night falls weshall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.'
The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on the current thatflowed through the middle of the lake. They ate some food, and then they tookto their paddles and hastened on their way. The sides of the westward hillsfell into shadow, and the Sun grew round and red. Here and there a misty starpeered out. The three peaks loomed before them, darkling in the twilight.
Rauros was roaring with a great voice. Already night was laid on the flowingwaters when the travellers came at last under the shadow of the hills.
The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was behind them. Theycould go no further without choice between the east-way and the west. The laststage of the Quest was before them.
_Chapter 10_
The Breaking of the Fellowship

Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon its westernside under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water fromthe feet of Amon Hen. Behind it rose the first gentle slopes of the hill cladwith trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of thelake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.
'Here we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn of ParthGalen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope that no evil hasyet come here.'
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside them they madetheir camp. They set a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies. IfGollum had contrived to follow them, he remained unseen and unheard.
Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in hissleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turnit was to watch.
`Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. `It is not your watch.'
`I do not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has beengrowing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.'
`Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? '
`Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn.
Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edgesgleamed dimly in the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very near, and yet toonear, it seems.'
`I feared as much,' said Aragorn. `But maybe they are not on this side ofthe River. The light of Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than spiesof Mordor roaming on the slopes of Amon Lhaw. I have never heard before ofOrcs upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows what may happen in these evil days, now thatMinas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of Anduin. We must go warilytomorrow.'
The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black barsof cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun lit them frombeneath with flames of murky red; but soon it climbed above them into a clearsky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold. Frodo looked out eastwardand gazed at the tall island. Its sides sprang sheer out of the running water.
High up above the tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed,
mounting one head above another; and above them again were grey faces ofinaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many birds were circlingabout it, but no sign of other living things could be seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. `The day hascome at last,' he said: 'the day of choice which we have long delayed. Whatshall now become of our Company that has travelled so far in fellowship? Shallwe turn west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or turn east to theFear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and that aseach may choose? Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt here.
The enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fear that the Orcs mayalready be on this side of the water.'
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.
'Well, Frodo,' said Aragorn at last. `I fear that the burden is laid uponyou. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own way you alone canchoose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and though Ihave tried to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he had for thishour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he were here now thechoice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.'
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. `I know that haste isneeded, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, andI will speak. Let me be alone! '
Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. `Very well, Frodo son of Drogo,'
he said. `You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We will stay herefor a while. But do not stray far or out of call.'
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been watching

his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered: 'Plain as apikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.' ,
Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while the othersrestrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes of Boromir followedFrodo intently, until he passed out of sight in the trees at the foot of AmonHen.
Wandering aimlessly at first in the wood, Frodo found that his feet wereleading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to a path, thedwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places stairs of stone hadbeen hewn, but now they were cracked and worn, and split by the roots oftrees. For some while he climbed, not caring which way he went, until he cameto a grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and in the midst was a wide flatstone. The little upland lawn was open upon the East and was filled now withthe early sunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him,
to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between him andthe untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring mingled with adeep throbbing boom.
He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands, staringeastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilboleft the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and ponderedeverything that he could remember of Gandalf's words. Time went on, and stillhe was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to him thatsomething was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon him. He sprang up andturned; but all that he saw to his surprise was Boromir, and his face wassmiling and kind.
`I was afraid for you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn isright and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and you least ofall: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now andtalk for a while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where there areso many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together may perhapsfind wisdom.'
`You are kind,' answered Frodo. 'But I do not think that any speech willhelp me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid of doing it, Boromir:
afraid.'
Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured inthe branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do notsuffer needlessly? ' he said. `I wish to help you. You need counsel in yourhard choice. Will you not take mine? '
'I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,' saidFrodo. 'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.'
`Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply.
'Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal of theburden that is laid on me. Against-well, if it must be said, against trust inthe strength and truth of Men.'
`Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your littlecountry, though you knew it not.'
'I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is changing. Thewalls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong enough. If theyfail, what then? '
'We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that theywill not fail.'
'No hope while the Ring lasts,' said Frodo.
'Ah! The Ring! ' said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not astrange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for so small athing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the Houseof Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? '
Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the strangegleam in Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind and friendly. 'It is best

that it should lie hidden,' he answered.
'As you wish. I care not,' said Boromir. 'Yet may I not even speak of it?
For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of the Enemy: of itsevil uses not of its good. The world is changing, you say. Minas Tirith willfall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were with the Enemy.
But why, if it were with us? '
'Were you not at the Council? ' answered Frodo. `Because we cannot useit, and what is done with it turns to evil.'
Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go on,' he cried.
'Gandalf, Elrond 每 all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselvesthey may be right. These elves and half-elves and wizards, they would come togrief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. Buteach to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be corrupted. We ofMinas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial. We do not desirethe power of wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in ajust cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the -Ring of Power.
It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad not to use it, touse the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the ruthless, thesealone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior do in this hour, a greatleader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ringwould give me power of Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and allmen would flock to my banner!'
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemedto have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and themustering of men; and he drew plans for great alliances and glorious victoriesto be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty king, benevolentand wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.
'And they tell us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not say _destroy_
it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope of doing so. It doesnot. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halfling should walkblindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance of recapturing it forhimself. Folly!
'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning now suddenly to Frodoagain. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should pardonyou. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?'
'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo. 'Simply afraid. But I am glad to haveheard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.'
`Then you will come to Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir. His eyes wereshining and his face eager.
`You misunderstand me,' said Frodo.
'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My cityis not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than from here.
We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news of what the Enemy isdoing before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he said. `You need restbefore your venture. if go you must.' He laid his hand on the hobbit'sshoulder in friendly fashion; but Frodo felt the hand trembling withsuppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the tallMan, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength.
`Why are you so unfriendly? ' said Boromir. `I am a true man, neitherthief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but I give you my wordthat I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at least let me make trial of myplan? Lend me the Ring! '
`No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.'
`It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,' cried Boromir.
`How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death and ruiningour cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is the men of N~menor,
and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might have beenmine. It should be mine. Give it to me! '
Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great flat stone stoodbetween them. `Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why

not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt and fear? You can lay theblame on me, if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it byforce. For I am too strong for you, halfling,' he cried; and suddenly hesprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face washideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes.
Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was onlyone thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring upon its chain andquickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The Mangasped, stared for a moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking hereand there among the rocks and trees.
'Miserable trickster!' he shouted. `Let me get my hands on you! Now I seeyour mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us all. You have onlywaited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse you and all halflings todeath and darkness! ' Then, catching his foot on a stone, he fell sprawlingand lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his own curse hadstruck him down; then suddenly he wept.
He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears. 'Whathave I said? ' he cried. `What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called. 'Comeback! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! '
There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was alreadyfar away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror and grief shookhim, seeing in his thought the mad fierce face of Boromir, and his burning
eyes.
Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted, gasping forbreath. He saw as through a mist a wide flat circle, paved with mighty flags,
and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and in the middle, set upon fourcarven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps. Up he wentand sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like a lost child that had clamberedupon the throne of mountain-kings.
At first he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of mist in which
there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here and there the mistgave way and he saw many visions: small and clear as if they were under hiseyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright livingimages. The world seemed to have shrunk and fallen silent. He was sitting uponthe Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of N~menor.
Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and forestsunexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great River lay like a ribbon beneathhim, and the Misty Mountains stood small and hard as broken teeth. Westward helooked and saw the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, the pinnacle ofIsengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below his very feet theGreat River curled like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Raurosinto a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume. And EthirAnduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of sea-birdswhirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green and silversea, rippling in endless lines.
But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The Misty Mountainswere crawling like anthills: orcs were issuing out of a thousand holes. Underthe boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly strife of Elves and Men and fellbeasts. The land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; smokerose on the borders of L车rien.
Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured fromIsengard. From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to sea; and out of theEast Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon horses,
chariots of chieftains and laden wains. All the power of the Dark Lord was inmotion. Then turning south again he beheld Minas Tirith. Far away it seemed.
and beautiful: white-walled, many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountain-
seat; its battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright withmany banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith was setanother fortress, greater and more strong. Thither, eastward, unwilling hiseye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grinning gates

of Minas Morgul. and the haunted Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth, thevalley of terror in the Land of Mordor. Darkness lay there under the Sun. Fireglowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising. Thenat last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement upon battlement, black,
immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, gate of steel, tower of adamant, he sawit: Barad-d.r, Fortress of Sauron. All hope left him.
And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower that didnot sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A fierce eager willwas there. It leaped towards him; almost like a finger he felt it, searchingfor him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where he was.
Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon Tol Brandir he threw himself from theseat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood.
He heard himself crying out: _Never, never!_Or was it: _Verily I come, Icome to you_? He could not tell. Then as a flash from some other point ofpower there came to his mind another thought: _Take it off! Take it off! Fool,
take it off! Take off the Ring!_
The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced betweentheir piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he was aware of himselfagain. Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and with oneremaining instant in which to do so. He took the Ring off his finger. He waskneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat. A black shadow seemed to passlike an arm above him; it missed Amon Hen and groped out west, and faded. Thenall the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree.
Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will wasfirm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. `I will do now what Imust,' he said. 'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already atwork even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does moreharm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too dearto me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns forMinas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. Iwill go alone. At once.'
He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where Boromir hadfound him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and callsfrom the woods near the shore below.
'They'll be hunting for me,' he said. `I wonder how long I have beenaway. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can I do? ' he muttered. 'Imust go now or I shall never go. I shan't get a chance again. I hate leavingthem, and like this without any explanation. But surely they will understand.
Sam will. And what else can I do?'
Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished andpassed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they had beensilent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting in a circle, andthey were talking. Every now and again they made efforts to speak of otherthings, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragornconcerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and the remnants ofits great works that could still be seen in this strange border-land of theEmyn Muil: the stone kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stairbeside the falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed backto Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why was he hesitating?
`He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,' saidAragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Companyto go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and must fear that thesecret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no nearer tothe Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
`We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the LordDenethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyondhis power: either to keep the Burden secret. or to hold off the full might ofthe Enemy when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose inFrodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.'

'Grievous is our loss,' said Legolas. 'Yet we must needs make up ourminds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us callhim back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.'
`And so should I,' said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent to help theBearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us isunder any oath or command to seek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting fromLothl车rien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached thelast choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose MinasTirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.'
`And I too will go with him,' said Legolas. `It would be faithless now tosay farewell.'
'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'Butif he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think that allshould. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two,
or one alone. If you would let me choose, then I should appoint threecompanions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; and myself.
Boromir will return to his own city, where his father and his people need him;
and with him the others should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, ifLegolas is not willing to leave us.'
`That won't do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and Ialways intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But we did notrealize what that would mean. It seemed different so far away, in the Shire orin Rivendell. It would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why can'twe stop him?'
'We must stop him,' said Pippin. `And that is what he is worrying about,
I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And he doesn't like toask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to Mordoralone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly old hobbit, he ought to knowthat he hasn't got to ask. He ought to know that if we can't stop him, weshan't leave him.'
'Begging your pardon,' said Sam. 'I don't think you understand my masterat all. He isn't hesitating about which way to go. Of course not! What's thegood of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your pardon, MasterBoromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that Boromir,
who at first had been sitting silent on the outside of the circle, was nolonger there.
`Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried. 'He's been a bitqueer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's not in this business. He's off tohis home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows he'sgot to find the Cracks of Doom, if he can. But he's _afraid_. Now it's come tothe point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of coursehe's had a bit of schooling, so to speak-we all have-since we left home, orhe'd be so terrified he'd just fling the Ring in the River and bolt. But he'sstill too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us either: whetherwe'll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That's another thingthat's bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he'll want to go alone.
Mark my words! We're going to have trouble when he comes back. For he'll screwhimself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.'
'I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,' said Aragorn. `Andwhat shall we do, if you prove right? '
'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin.
'I wonder? ' said Aragorn. `He is the Bearer, and the fate of the Burdenis on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or theother. Nor do I think that we should succeed, if we tried. There are otherpowers at work far stronger.'
`Well, I wish Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let usget it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up? '
`Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour is long passed. The morning is wearingaway. We must call for him.'
At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from the trees and walked

towards them without speaking. His face looked grim and sad. He paused as ifcounting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with his eyes onthe ground.
`Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? '
Boromir hesitated for a second. `Yes, and no,' he answered slowly. `Yes:
I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to come toMinas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and he left me. He vanished. Ihave never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard of it intales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not find him again. I thought hewould return to you.'
'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and nottoo kindly at Boromir.
`Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.'
`This is bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know what this Man hasbeen up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn't ought to have;
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!'
'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had escaped theunwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.'
now.'
`But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages
`How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn.
`Half an hour, maybe,' he answered. `Or it might be an hour. I havewandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know! ' He put his headin his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.
`An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. `We must try and find him atonce. Come on! '
`Wait a moment! ' cried Aragorn. `We must divide up into pairs, andarrange-here, hold on! Wait! '
It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off first.
Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing westward into thetrees by the shore, shouting: _Frodo! Frodo!_ in their clear, high hobbit-
voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madness seemed tohave fallen on the Company.
`We shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn. `Boromir! I do notknow what part you have played in this mischief, but help now! Go after thosetwo young hobbits, and guard them at the least, even if you cannot find Frodo.
Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I shall returnsoon.'
Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as hereached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling uphill,
panting and calling, _Frodo!_
`Come with me, Sam! ' he said. `None of us should be alone. There ismischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, tosee what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went thisway. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path.
Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, andsoon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead.
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head.
`Whoa, Sam Gamgee! ' he said aloud. `Your legs are too short, so use yourhead! Let me see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not his way; but he hasn'ttold us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed himself up tothe point, sudden. He made up his mind at last to go. Where to? Off East. Notwithout Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel hard.'
Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears. 'Steady,
Gamgee! ' he said. `Think, if you can! He can't fly across rivers, and hecan't jump waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's got to get back to the boats.
Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning! '
Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Uphe got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen by the

shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the water. No one was there. Thereseemed to be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He stoodgazing for a moment. stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the bank allby itself. With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat slipped into thewater.
`Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! ' called Sam, and flung himself from thebank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a yard. With a cry anda splash he fell face downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went under,
and the River closed over his curly head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled andthe boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam by the hair as he cameup, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.
`Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! '
`Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam. `I'm drownded. I can't see your hand.'
`Here it is. Don't pinch, lad! I won't let you go. Tread water and don'tflounder, or you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of the side, and letme use the paddle! '
With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam wasable to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the Ring and steppedashore again.
`Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said.
'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, tryingto go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where would you be now?
'
`Safely on my way.'
`Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I couldn'thave a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.'
'It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,' said Frodo and Icould not have borne that.'
`Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam.
`But I am going to Mordor.'
`I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I'm comingwith you.'
`Now, Sam,' said Frodo, `don't hinder me! The others will be coming backat any minute. If they catch me here. I shall have to argue and explain, and Ishall never have the heart or the chance to get off. But I must go at once.
It's the only way.'
`Of course it is,' answered Sam. 'But not alone. I'm coming too, orneither of us isn't going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.'
Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart.
`Leave one! 'he said. `We'll need it. But you can't come like this withoutyour gear or food or anything.'
'Just hold on a moment, and I'll get my stuff!' cried Sam eagerly. 'It'sall ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping place,
fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he emptied theboat of his companions' goods grabbed a spare blanket, and some extra packagesof food, and ran back.
`So all my plan is spoilt! ' said Frodo. `It is no good trying to escapeyou. But I'm glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is plainthat we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find a saferoad! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them again.'
`Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam.
So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodopaddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly away. down thewestern arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of thegreat falls drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was hardwork to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drivethe boat eastward towards the far shore.
At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes of Amon Lhaw.

There they found a shelving shore, and they drew the boat out, high above thewater, and hid it as well as they could behind a great boulder. Thenshouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would bring themover the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Land of Shadow.
_Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring._
_The second part is called_THE TWO TOWERS_, since the events recounted init are dominated by_ORTHANC_, the citadel of Saruman, and the fortressof_MINAS MORGUL_ that guards the secret entrance to Mordor; it tells of thedeeds and perils of all the members of the now sundered fellowship, until thecoming of the Great Darkness._
_The third part tells of the last defence against the Shadow, and the endof the mission of the Ring-bearer in_THE RETURN OF THE KING.
=====================================================
★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 
本书下载于金沙论坛，如需更多好书，请访问:www.91txt.com 
☆金沙论坛☆ 
http://www.91txt.com 
TXT电子书 
技术支持：金沙中文网 
版权：本书籍版权归作者所有 
支持：本电子书技术支持可与金沙联系 
再次感谢您对本站的支持！ 
★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 

